 
Page 1 of 4 
June 10, 2025 
 
Mehmet Oz, Administrator 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services, 
P.O. Box 8013 
Baltimore, MD 21244-1850 
 
ATTENTION: CMS 1833-P 
 
 
 
Dear Administrator Mehmet Oz: 
 
 
The Curators of the University of Missouri and University Physicians, a large academic health 
system in mid-Missouri, appreciates and thanks you for the opportunity to comment on the 
Medicare Program; Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems for Acute Care 
Hospitals and the Long-Term Care Hospital Prospective Payment System and Policy 
Changes and Fiscal Year 2026 Rates; Requirements for Quality Programs; and Other 
Policy Changes proposed rule released April 2025.  Below we submit our comments for your 
consideration. 
 
1. RFI Query of PDMP:  We do NOT support changes to the Query PDMP measure as more 
development of the Query of PDMP measure numerator criteria is needed prior to any 
changes to a performance-based measure. The numerator criteria should have a “look-
back” period in which any PDMP query in this period will satisfy the numerator. For 
example, if a query was completed yesterday for a patient, it should not require another 
query today. The current requirement to complete a query with every prescription is very 
 
 
Page 2 of 4 
 
burdensome to the clinician. For inpatient encounters, the numerator requirement should 
be once per inpatient encounter as it is unlikely a patient will have additions to the PDMP 
during the same inpatient stay.  The most significant barrier for accurate performance 
reporting is the timing of the query in the order entry workflow. We have performed 
thorough reviews of our not met orders, and the issue has typically been with timing. The 
required timing does not coincide with clinical workflow and is an unnecessary burden 
for providers if timing done as required. The PDMP was reviewed prior to prescription 
transmission to the pharmacy, but due to variations in workflows [new prescriptions vs. 
refills/renewals, proposed orders from non-prescribers, resident physician orders etc.] the 
date/time stamp of the order compared to the query date/time stamp resulted in a not met 
status. If this measure changes to performance based, EHR vendors would need one year 
for reporting development and EH/CAH would need an additional two years to adopt, 
validate, and improve performance as PI is a performance-based program. The measure 
would not be eligible to be performance-based until performance calendar year 2029. 
2. RFI Public Health objective:   
a. Currently, eligible hospitals and CAHs can earn 25 points for reporting on all six 
required measures.  Under a revised scoring approach, should we specify that 
eligible hospitals and CAHs could earn up to 5 points for each measure, for a total 
of 30 points for the objective, but must earn at least 1 point for each measure to 
earn a score for the Medicare Promoting Interoperability program, in addition to 
meeting the overall threshold for the program?  
We support returning to a menu of public health reporting options instead of 
requiring all measures in the objectives to be met. For example, selecting four of 
 
 
Page 3 of 4 
 
five measures instead of requiring all five measures to be submitted. Bonus points 
could be awarded to eligible hospitals and CAHs that are able to submit more 
measures. 
b. Should we score all public health measures for which we finalize a numerator and 
denominator based on performance?  Or should we only score a subset of 
measures based on performance? 
We do not support shifting to numerator/denominator reporting requirements for 
public health reporting measures and support continued yes/no attestation.  The 
implementation of electronic exchange of public health data is largely dependent 
on the public health agency’s readiness to accept the data.  The requirement to 
move from pre-production to production in a year has been challenging for 
eligible hospitals and CAHs as public health agencies onboard data based on their 
resources and timelines. Our organization submitted their intent to submit eCR 
data as soon as our state declared readiness 1/10/2023.  Our full go live was 
10/1/2024.  We were fortunate to be one of the first organizations onboarded and 
we had the resources to onboard as soon as our PHA was ready. Additionally, the 
CDC onboarding contact advised that COVID-19 + Mpox / Orthopox, RSV, and 
influenza were the only conditions being onboarded at that time.  Reports to 
capture numerator and denominator for these measures would be burdensome to 
develop as the transmission of public health data is often accomplished through 
multiple systems that are not owned or under the purview of the eligible hospital 
or CAH.  Public health agencies in different states have varying degrees of 
implementation and data elements the agency is prepared to accept.  Numerators 
 
 
Page 4 of 4 
 
and denominators will not reflect the performance of the eligible hospital or CAH 
but reflect the status of the public health agency’s solution development, yet the 
hospital and CAH will face financial penalties for perceived poor performance. 
We support maintaining the public health reporting objective in the Promoting 
Interoperability Program and support continued yes/no attestation for measure 
compliance.  We believe that eligible hospitals, CAHs and public health agencies 
have vested interest in timely and comprehensive data sharing.  Requirements on 
what data elements will be transmitted is best left to the public health agency as 
their readiness to accept the data impacts what the eligible hospital or CAH will 
send. We do not support any performance-based measurement for public health 
reporting as it reflects the status/performance of the public health agency and not 
the eligible hospital or CAH.   
 
We look forward to the final rule in consideration of the above comments and recommendations. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Lori Johnson, MHA, RRT 
Director-Ambulatory Quality 
