\\4136-5418-7356  v3  
© Ultromics Limited 2023
ultromics.com
June 2, 2025
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION
Dr. Mehmet Oz, 
Administrator, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services
Attention: CMS–1833-P
P.O. Box 8013
Baltimore, MD 21244–1850
Re:
Medicare Program: Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment System 
[CMS-1833-P]
Dear Administrator Oz:
On behalf of Ultromics, I am writing to provide comments on the hospital inpatient 
prospective payment system (OPPS) proposed rule for fiscal year (FY) 2026 (Proposed 
Rule).1  Ultromics has developed a software-only medical device known as EchoGo® Heart 
Failure (EchoGo) that is used to furnish a service that utilizes information contained in a 
routine echocardiogram to help physicians detect heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction (HFpEF).  Effective October 1, 2023, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
(CMS) approved new technology add-on payments (NTAP) for EchoGo, and it has had 
NTAP status since then – in FYs 2024 and 2025.  By this comment letter we urge CMS to 
continue NTAP status for EchoGo for FY 2026 for the reasons stated below. 
BACKGROUND
Ultromics is a pioneer in precision heart failure detection.  Our ground-breaking 
platform, EchoGo, is transforming the way heart failure is diagnosed using artificial 
intelligence and cardiac ultrasound as a modality.  The technology empowers clinicians to 
make precise, efficient, and accurate assessments of heart failure, leveraging one of the 
largest known heart disease datasets in echocardiography.  The model was trained on 
thousands of patients to accurately detect disease and was validated against 5-year patient 
outcomes.  The technology has been built in collaboration with Mayo Clinic and the NHS. 
Ultromics’ mission is to ensure that no treatable cardiovascular disease goes undiagnosed — 
by using AI to find the right patients, at the right time, so they can benefit from the therapies 
that change lives. 
Among patients with heart failure, about 50% have heart failure with HFpEF.  HFpEF 
is a syndrome that is associated with various comorbidities characterized by elevated left 
ventricular filling pressures at rest or during exercise.  It is the most common type of heart 
failure in the elderly, and there is a high mortality rate for the condition.  Yet, it can be a 
difficult condition to detect, with up to 64% of HFpEF patients being undetected, leading to 
1 90 Fed. Reg. 18002 (Apr. 30, 2025). 
\\4136-5418-7356  v3  
© Ultromics Limited 2023
ultromics.com
increased hospitalizations and mortality.2  Improved detection of this condition is particularly 
opportune now in light of the fact that a new drug class has recently received approved 
indications for treatment of HFpEF and they have quickly become standard of care treatment, 
per clinical guidelines, for the condition.3 
EchoGo from Ultromics is a software-only medical device that uses echocardiograms 
to develop information that may be useful to physicians in detecting HFpEF.  Applying the 
software to the obtained echocardiograms, Ultromics uses the device to produce a report that 
is 90% accurate in detecting HFpEF and thus can ensure that patients receive treatment that 
reduces the risk of hospitalization.4  The service is furnished predominantly by hospitals, 
which are treating heart failure patients on either an inpatient or an outpatient basis.  
Ultromics charges hospitals on a per-service basis.  Hospitals incur additional costs for the 
service beyond this charge, including non-physician personnel to access the report, use of a 
PACS Workstation, and some initial set-up fees (setting up information technology (IT) 
systems for interconnectivity with Ultromics systems and integration time for cardiac 
sonographer). 
Pursuant to the Proposed Rule, CMS would discontinue NTAP for EchoGo for FY 
2026 because it attributes a newness date for the technology as November 23, 2022, which 
coincides with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of the device.  Using that 
newness date, and the three-year anniversary of that being November 23, 2025, CMS applies 
its policy of the three-year anniversary falling in the first half of FY 2026 to propose not 
granting a third year of NTAP status for the EchoGo.5
DISCUSSION
We urge CMS not to finalize that proposal, but instead to continue NTAP status for 
EchoGo for another year.  This request is consistent with CMS’s longstanding policy that 
“the newness period does not necessarily start with the approval date for the medical service 
or technology and does not necessarily start with the issuance of a distinct code[, but] begins 
with availability of the product on the market, which is when data become available.”6  As 
detailed below, EchoGo was not available on the market until November 2023, which is 
when Ultromics was able to enter its first contract with a customer and invoice a customer for 
the service.  As such, the three-year anniversary of entry into the U.S. market would be in 
November of 2026, such that continued NTAP for FY 2026 is warranted under existing 
policy. 
 
In the FY 2025 IPPS final rule, CMS explained its policy on when to continue (or 
end) NTAP status as follows:   
 
Generally, we use the FDA marketing authorization date as the indicator of the time 
when a technology begins to become available on the market and data reflecting the 
2 Borlaug et al., J Am Coll Cardiol 2023;81:1810–1834.
3 Heidenreich et al. “2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines”, 
Circ 145(18), (Apr. 2022).
4 Akerman et al.  “Automated Echocardiographic Detection of Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction 
Using Artificial Intelligence”, JACC: Advances, 2(6), (Aug. 2023).
5 90 Fed. Reg. at 18090. 
6 89 Fed. Reg. 68986, 69241 (Aug.18, 2024). 
\\4136-5418-7356  v3  
© Ultromics Limited 2023
ultromics.com
costs of the technology begin to become available for recalibration of the DRG 
weights. In specific circumstances, we have recognized a date later than the FDA 
marketing authorization date as the appropriate starting point for the 2- to 3-year 
newness period. For example, we have recognized a later date where an applicant 
could prove a delay in actual availability of a product after FDA approval or 
clearance.7
 
Consistent with this policy, CMS should not use the identified date of November 23, 
2022 (date of FDA marketing authorization) as the newness start date for EchoGo because 
that does not reflect when the product was first available.  That occurred more than a year 
later, as we document herein.
 
The reasons for that gap in time from FDA clearance to sales of EchoGo are that upon 
FDA clearance Ultromics had to perform considerable architectural and workflow changes to 
integrate the software into the product platform. Additionally, it took considerable time to 
implement our product platform into a hospital’s Picture Archiving and Communication 
System (PACS) and electronic health record (EHR) systems, all of which delayed us being 
able to have a viable and available product for which we could sign a commercial contract 
until 12 months after clearance.  Indeed, it was not until late in 2023 that we had taken such 
stops that we could pursue contracts with customers, the first of which was signed in 
November of 2023, leading to a first invoice dated November 30, 2023.  In light of this 
information about when EchoGo was truly available on the market, supplemented by our 
understanding that there are no claims for the ICD-10-PCS procedure code tied to the 
technology (XXE2X19, as noted in Table II.E.-01 in the FY 2025 final rule8) in the MedPAR 
database of FY 2023 claims, we ask CMS to apply its current policy and consider the starting 
point for the newness period for EchoGo to begin in November of 2023, not November of 
2022, such that EchoGo would continue to have NTAP status for FY 2026.
 
While we urge CMS to apply its existing policy to finalize continued NTAP status for 
EchoGo for FY 2026, should CMS not believe this result is warranted under current policy, 
we believe it would be appropriate for CMS to revise its policy so that all technologies would 
be treated equally and have NTAP status for three years.  We recognize that CMS has 
considered this concept previously and rejected it, noting that its prospective move to using 
October 1 in this context was to address the FDA marketing authorization deadline 
change.9  While that may have been the thinking in the FY 2025 rulemaking, CMS should 
consider that fact that it is now arbitrarily treating products differently, using the October 1 
date for some products with NTAP status, but not all.  CMS should end this arbitrary 
treatment, which is unexplained.  
 
Indeed, CMS should do what it did a number of years ago under the hospital 
outpatient prospective payment system pass-through policy.  For many years, CMS ended 
pass-through status at the start of the calendar year, which led to variability across products in 
the length of the pass-through period.  Effective January 1, 2017, CMS changed its policy to 
end that variability and to “allow for the maximum pass-through period for each pass-through 
drug without exceeding the statutory limit of 3 years” and “to afford a pass-through period 
that is as close to a full 3 years as possible for all pass-through drugs, biologicals, and 
7 89 Fed. Reg. at 69238. 
8 89 Fed. Reg. at 89124. 
9 89 Fed. Reg. at 69240. 
\\4136-5418-7356  v3  
© Ultromics Limited 2023
ultromics.com
radiopharmaceuticals.”10  We recommend that CMS follow its approach on the duration of 
the pass-through period and allow all products to have NTAP status for three years moving 
forward.
 
Such a policy change would also improve the rate setting for technologies with NTAP 
status.  As CMS has said, the intent of the NTAP program is to pay for new technologies for 
a few years when the costs of the new technology are not reflected in the MS-DRG 
weights.11  Of course, during the NTAP period, data can be collected for CMS to use for 
future rate setting.  Affording all technologies a third year of NTAP will lead to CMS having 
better data to use when determine whether and how to work the new technology into the MS-
DRGs.  
As the above discussion of EchoGo shows, it can take a considerable period of time 
for a new technology to enter into the market.  Further, uptake on new technologies is 
typically incremental.  As such, just as is the case with pass-through products, having a later 
year’s data to use for rate setting should provide for the use of a more fulsome data set for 
rate setting.  In the FY 2025 final rule, in the context of a discussion of the duration of NTAP 
status, CMS said “we do not believe that 2 years’ worth of data would be insufficient to 
inform rate-setting for the inpatient setting.”12  Respectfully, we believe that CMS should not 
settle for data that would not be insufficient, but instead should strive to use as fulsome a data 
set as possible when making the important determination as to how to work a new technology 
into the MS-DRGs.  Having NTAP status for 3 years would improve the data CMS would 
have to use for rate setting purposes, which is another reason to revise current policy.
CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons explained above, we urge CMS to continue NTAP status for EchoGo 
for FY 2026.  That would be the third year of NTAP status for the product and thus would not 
run afoul of the duration limit in the statute.  This desired result can be achieved without a 
change in CMS policy, but rather through the application of the market availability date 
component of CMS’s NTAP policy.  Moreover, there are good policy reasons for CMS to 
revise its policy on the duration of NTAP status, which also would lead to NTAP status for 
EchoGo for FY 2026.  Regardless of the approach taken, we urge CMS to propose in the 
upcoming FY 2026 IPPS proposed rule that EchoGo will have NTAP status for FY 2026.  
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me.  Thank you for your 
consideration.
Sincerely,
Dr. Ross Upton PhD
Ultromics Founder & CEO
 
10 81 Fed. Reg. 79562, 79662 (Nov. 14, 2016). 
11 89 Fed. Reg. at 69238. 
12 89 Fed. Reg. at 69241. 
