 
 
June 10, 2025 
CMS-1833-P 
 
Dear Administrator Oz, 
Thank you for the opportunity to share comments on the Medicare Program; Hospital Inpatient 
Prospective Payment Systems for Acute Care Hospitals and the Long-Term Care Hospital 
Prospective Payment System and Policy Changes and Fiscal Year 2026 Rates; Requirements for 
Quality Programs; and Other Policy Changes.1  
Founded in 2013, Unite Us is the nation’s leading software company bringing the health care, 
government, and human service sectors together to coordinate care in real-time and improve the 
health and well-being of communities. Our technology powers the prediction, delivery, and 
payment of non-medical drivers of health to eliminate fragmented silos between health and 
community-based care teams, reduce the burden placed on individuals seeking care, and 
improve health outcomes while lowering costs. Our goal is to ensure every individual, no matter 
who they are or where they live, can access the critical services they need to thrive.  
We commend CMS for proposing changes to the measurement and improvement of the quality of 
care and services provided to Medicare beneficiaries in inpatient facility settings. Policies that 
allow for the inclusion of evidence-based non-clinical and community-based activities that 
address non-medical drivers of health and other upstream factors can incentivize plans and 
providers to deliver preventive, whole-person care for their patients. This reduces long-term 
burden on the healthcare system, reduces costs, and promotes community and individual health 
improvement. Screening for non-medical needs is a critical front-line activity. However, screening 
alone, without coordinating and tracking the community based intervention, will not improve 
preventive care and lower costs.  
Further details on our recommendations are on the following pages. Please contact me with any 
questions regarding these recommendations. We look forward to continued dialogue with you on 
these important issues and hope to have the opportunity to meet with your staff soon. 
Sincerely, 
 
Keith Gardner​
SVP, Regulatory and Government Affairs​
keith.gardner@uniteus.com​
UniteUs.com 
1 CMS concurrently released proposed rules related to payment and quality reporting changes for Skilled 
Nursing Facilities, Inpatient Psychiatric Facilities, Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities, and Hospices. To 
streamline our comments we apply our feedback broadly to the changes proposed to the respective 
quality reporting programs, collectively referred to as “Quality Reporting Programs.” 
217 Broadway Floor 8 New York, NY 10007​
​
 www.UniteUs.com  
 
 
Comments 
Unite Us applauds CMS’s continued commitment to refining the measure sets for Quality 
Reporting Programs. We support CMS’s efforts to reduce administrative burden while driving 
meaningful insights on the quality of care and services provided to Medicare beneficiaries. We 
also applaud CMS’s commitment to addressing non-medical drivers of health by exploring new 
quality measures related to prevention, nutrition, and individual well-being. 
For more than a decade, Unite Us has grown nationally to power real-time coordinated care 
networks of health care, government, and community based services across the country. We 
have facilitated more than 70 million connections to care, and we enable access to more than 1.5 
million community based and social services across the country, including housing, mental and 
behavioral health, transportation, education, employment, legal, food, and benefits assistance. 
Our experience has shown us first-hand that screening for unmet needs is an important first step 
in helping individuals achieve self-sufficiency and improved quality of life. For example, engaging 
community health workers with high-risk patients before and after they leave the hospital can 
help with identifying non-medical needs early and provide continued support in the community. 
By layering data on non-medical needs with clinical quality measures, health systems and 
hospitals can tailor interventions and improve long-term health outcomes.  
As CMS stated in the FY 2024 Hospital IPPS and LTCH PPS Proposed Rule, in which the 
Screening for Social Drivers of Health (SDoH) and Screen Positive Rate for SDoH measures were 
proposed for adoption, “collecting patient-level…data through screening is essential for the 
long-term in encouraging meaningful collaboration between healthcare providers and 
community-based organizations, and in implementing and evaluating related innovations in 
health and social care delivery.” In our feedback to CMS on that proposed rule, Unite Us 
supported the inclusion of such measures as a starting point for improving community health. 
However, we also cautioned that “assessing needs without ensuring they are addressed, and 
addressed with urgency, is unlikely to improve quality significantly.” That point remains central to 
our position today. 
We believe that screening measures alone are insufficient. Without corresponding investment 
in 
real-time 
coordination 
and 
referral 
infrastructure, 
along 
with 
partnerships 
with 
community-based organizations (CBOs), assessing needs without ensuring they are addressed, 
and addressed with urgency, is unlikely to significantly improve quality. As we explained in our 
previous comment letters, the measures document an administrative process only and do not 
ultimately provide insights into the extent providers are connecting patients to needed resources 
and services or whether patients are actually benefiting from the screenings. We recommend the 
creation of quality measures that evaluate whether services to address non-medical needs are 
coordinated, tracked, and provided in a timely manner. In other words, when hospitals identify an 
unmet need or barrier that needs to be addressed, they should be measured on the intervention 
and outcome.  
We therefore urge CMS to prioritize measures that assess both identification and outcomes. 
To that end, we recommend inclusion of a measure similar to NCQA’s HEDIS Social Needs 
Screening and Intervention (SNS-E) measure. Although designed for health plans, SNS-E 
provides a useful framework for hospitals of a true measure of community and social service 
intervention. The SNS-E measure is inclusive of both enrollee screening for social needs and 
whether the enrollee receives a corresponding intervention if screened positive. By contrast, the 
current Hospital VBP total performance score (TPS) domains (Clinical, Safety, Patient and 
2 
 
 
Community Engagement and Cost and Effectiveness) do not measure whether a corresponding 
intervention was delivered. Including measures in the existing TPS domains that assess 
providers' ability to identify and intervene to address patient’s non-medical needs further 
incentivizes progress on key risk factors that drive health improvement. 
Many health systems are focused on reducing readmissions and patients who are frequently 
readmitted have more than twice the likelihood of having more than one unaddressed 
non-medical need. In the population health space, for conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, 
and other ambulatory quality measures, the use of Unite Us technology allows hospitals to 
overlay factors such as food insecurity, housing, and transportation to those quality measures to 
see where there is a demonstrable impact on health outcomes. Providers are then able to tailor 
strategies and interventions to continuously improve performance on those health outcomes. 
Tying screening for social needs to quality scores, while originally meant to standardize data 
collection and encourage provider participation, has resulted in over-screening without 
meaningfully helping patients. Incentivizing screening without also funding downstream 
infrastructure to intervene and address positive screens—e.g., referrals, community partnerships, 
building community-based organization capacity—only exacerbates disparities rather than 
reducing them. As our hospital and health system partners have shared with us, addressing 
non-medical needs isn’t a one-off initiative - it is now, and must be, a part of the organization’s 
long-term strategy and operations. Organizations that have taken steps to integrate screening for 
non-medical needs into routine care, using their electronic health records in conjunction with 
Unite Us’ closed-loop referral system, are scaling and streamlining processes to ensure patients’ 
needs are identified early and addressed proactively with external partners in a cohesive and 
standardized approach.  
In evaluating how to address these issues, CMS can consider adopting the following positions:  
●​ Encourage voluntary, targeted screening paired with infrastructure grants, such as 
HITECH-like funding for electronic and outcome focused referral management and 
coordination platforms to track delivery of services in community based settings;  
●​ Develop contextualized quality measures that assess not just screening for non-medical 
needs but also follow-up, patient engagement, and community capacity; and  
●​ Support technical assistance to help providers build partnerships with community-based 
organizations and adopt technology solutions. 
Finally, regarding CMS’ request for input on new measures for nutrition and well-being, Unite Us 
supports the incorporation of new measures that are endorsed and tested by external validators. 
We recommend the creation of measures that evaluate whether services to address non-medical 
needs are provided in a timely manner, moving from administrative or process measures to 
outcome measures. Assessing needs without ensuring they are addressed, and addressed with 
urgency, is unlikely to improve quality significantly.  
Unite Us is grateful for CMS’s continued commitment to incentivizing “the improvement of care 
quality and health outcomes for all patients through transparency and use of appropriate quality 
measures.” Screening for social needs was only a first step. To deliver on the promise of 
person-centered care, CMS should consider incentivizing systems that connect individuals to 
services and track outcomes. We look forward to working with the agency to help build a 
healthcare system where identified needs have paths to resolution. 
3 
 
