 
 
 
 
Submitted electronically via https://www.regulations.gov 
 
June 10, 2025 
 
Dr. Mehmet Oz 
Adminsitrator  
Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services  
7500 Security Boulevard 
Baltimore, MD 21244 
 
RE: FY2026 Inpatient Prospective Payment System Proposed Rule, File Code CMS-1833-P  
 
Dear Dr. Oz, 
 
The University of Pittsburgh Medical Center is a world-renowned health care provider, insurer, 
and academic center of excellence. A $28 billion health care provider and insurer, Pittsburgh-
based UPMC is investing in new models of patient-centered, cost-effective, accountable care. 
Our unique strategy of combining clinical and research excellence with business-like discipline 
translates into high-quality patient care for residents in Pennsylvania, New York, and Maryland 
and the global surrounding communities.  We are dedicated to the advancement of quality, 
patient safety, and affordability of healthcare. The largest nongovernmental employer in 
Pennsylvania, UPMC integrates more than 100,000 employees, 40 hospitals, 800 doctors’ 
offices and outpatient sites, and more than 4-million-member Insurance Services Division.  
 
UPMC respectfully submits comments as they primarily relate to: 
 
➢ Section VI. K. Hospital Readmission Reduction Program Updates and Changes 
➢ Section VI. L. Hospital Value-Based Purchasing (VBP) Program 
➢ Section VI. M. Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program Updates and 
Changes (HACRP) 
➢ Section X. B. Toward Digital Quality Management in CMS Quality Programs – 
Request for Information 
➢ Section X C. Requirements for and Changes to the Hospital Inpatient Quality 
Reporting (IQR) Program 
➢ Section X. F. Proposed Changes to the Medicare Promoting Interoperability 
Program  
➢ Section XI. A. Proposed Changes to the Transforming Episode Accountability 
Model (TEAM)  
 
Proposed Updates to Quality Reporting Programs 
• 
Proposed measure removal beginning with the CY2024 reporting period 
COVID-19 Vaccination among Health Care Personnel 
UPMC supports the proposed removal of the COVID-19 Vaccination Coverage Among 
Health Care Personnel measure. As the pandemic has evolved and vaccination rates 
have stabilized, this measure is no longer a meaningful indicator of current facility 
Tamra E. Minnier  
MSN, RN, FACHE, FAAN 
Senior Vice President, 
Health Services Division, 
and Chief Quality and 
Operational Excellence 
Officer, UPMC 
 
Forbes Tower,  
Suite 11086 
200 Lothrop Street 
Pittsburgh, PA  15213 
T 412-647-1602 
F 412-647-4881 
minnierte@upmc.edu 
 
Page 2 
performance or quality of care. Its removal allows the IQR Program to focus on more 
enduring and clinically relevant quality indicators. 
 
Social Drivers of Health Screening 
UPMC has significant concerns regarding the proposed removal of the Social 
Determinants of Health (SDOH) measures. While we understand CMS’s intent to 
streamline reporting and ensure inclusivity, we continue to strongly support the 
integration of SDOH into hospital quality reporting. These measures have been 
instrumental in recognizing the profound impact that socioeconomic and 
environmental factors have on patient outcomes. 
 
As outlined by the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion’s Healthy 
People 2030, “SDOH are conditions in the environments where people are born, live, 
learn, work, play, worship, and age that can affect a wide range of health, 
functioning, and quality-of-life outcomes and risks.” Hospitals and health systems—
including UPMC—have made substantial investments in screening for and addressing 
SDOH across all patient populations, not just those covered by Medicare. Eliminating 
these measures risks disincentivizing continued innovation and collaboration with 
community-based organizations that are essential to delivering whole-person care. 
 
CMS has also requested input on potential nutrition and well-being measures. In this 
context, we urge CMS to reconsider the removal of the SDOH measures. These 
screenings provide critical insight into patients’ lived experiences and serve as a vital 
tool for connecting individuals to nutrition, housing, transportation, and other 
community-based supports. 
 
Screening for housing instability, food insecurity, transportation barriers, utility 
difficulties, and interpersonal safety is foundational to delivering equitable, whole-
person care. Rather than eliminating these measures, UPMC encourages CMS 
to refine and strengthen them. As CMS explores new nutrition and well-being 
metrics, we recommend aligning them with existing SDOH measures to create a more 
integrated and actionable framework. This approach would shift the focus from 
compliance to holistic patient care, emphasizing well-being and improved health 
outcomes. 
 
• 
Proposed Hybrid Measure Refinements 
UPMC supports the proposed updates to the Hybrid Hospital-Wide Readmission and 
Mortality measures, including the revised 70% performance threshold, which allows 
for limited missing data. These updates will help hospitals succeed in the transition 
toward more robust electronic clinical quality measurement. 
 
However, UPMC requests clarification on the application of the missing data 
allowance. Specifically, we ask: 
 
 
Page 3 
Does the allowance of up to two missing clinical data elements and two missing 
linking variables apply per patient on an individual basis, or must the same 
elements be missing across all patients for the allowance to apply? 
 
We recognize the importance of thorough, timely, and accurate data collection to 
ensure high-quality patient care and outcomes. While we support CMS’s flexibility in 
the early years of mandatory reporting, we recommend that CMS prioritize 
improvements in the collection of clinical data elements (e.g., vital signs) before 
increasing performance thresholds for administrative elements (e.g., MBI number 
collection), which have less direct impact on patient care, should the future goal be 
to raise the 70% expectation for both measure components. 
 
Additionally, UPMC urges CMS to ensure that the hybrid measure data calculation 
process is fully validated and accurate prior to the start of the mandatory reporting 
period on July 1, 2025. UPMC has voluntarily submitted hybrid measure data for two 
consecutive reporting periods to proactively identify issues and improve internal 
processes. However, we have encountered inaccuracies in CMS-generated 
reports which has delayed meaningful feedback on submissions made prior to 
October 1, 2024. 
 
Given these challenges, UPMC strongly recommends that CMS delay the start of 
mandatory hybrid measure reporting by one additional year. This grace period would 
allow CMS to refine its data processing systems and give health systems additional 
time to prepare—particularly considering the added complexity of 
including Medicare Advantage beneficiaries beginning July 1, 2025. 
 
• 
Proposed Inclusion of Medicare Advantage  
UPMC recognizes the importance of maintaining an adequate denominator to ensure 
statistically sound and reliable performance data. We also see the value in a shorter 
performance period, as it provides hospitals and health systems with more current 
data, reducing the reliance on outdated metrics that may no longer reflect present-
day performance. 
 
However, we have concerns regarding the inclusion of Medicare Advantage 
(MA) data in CMS quality measures. Unlike Medicare Fee-for-Service (FFS), MA data 
is less standardized and lacks transparency, which raises questions about its 
readiness for integration into pay-for-performance programs. 
 
UPMC urges CMS to ensure that any measure incorporating the MA population 
undergoes a thorough review of: 
ꟷ Data accuracy and completeness 
ꟷ Appropriate risk adjustment methodologies 
ꟷ Potential unintended consequences, particularly for hospitals serving complex or 
underserved populations 
 
 
Page 4 
Introducing MA data into established performance measures without addressing 
these issues could expose hospitals to unwarranted financial penalties and 
reputational harm due to inconsistencies in data integrity and comparability. 
 
• 
Re-specify the risk model to use individual ICD-10 codes instead of HCCs 
UPMC thanks CMS for its continued commitment to evolving current models and 
supports the proposed shift from Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCCs) to ICD-10 
codes for risk stratification. We believe this adjustment will enable more 
individualized and granular risk adjustment, ultimately enhancing the accuracy and 
fairness of performance measurement. 
 
• 
Clinical Data Abstraction Center (CDAC) 
UPMC respectfully asks CMS to consider transitioning to an electronic format—such 
as through Managed File Transfer (MFT) or the Hospital Quality Reporting 
(HQR) system—for transmitting patient selections for CDAC validation under both 
the Inpatient and Outpatient Quality Reporting programs. 
 
Currently, these files are mailed to hospital or corporate Health Information 
Management (HIM) teams. This process introduces risks such as: 
ꟷ Delayed receipt 
ꟷ Misplacement of physical mail 
ꟷ Processing delays due to staff absences 
 
By adopting an electronic request process, like the one used for the Patient Safety 
CDAC, CMS could enable a more timely, predictable, and efficient method for both 
sending and receiving CDAC validation requests.  UPMC appreciates CMS’s 
consideration of this recommendation and its ongoing efforts to modernize quality 
reporting infrastructure. 
 
Proposed Changes to the Medicare Promoting Interoperability Program 
• 
Proposal to define the EHR reporting period in CY 2026 and subsequent years 
UPMC supports the proposal to define the EHR reporting period for CY 2026 and 
subsequent years as a minimum of any continuous 180-day period within that 
calendar year. This timeframe offers consistency and flexibility for eligible hospitals 
and CAHs. It also allows eligible hospitals and CAHs the opportunity to adequately 
prepare for and implement updates to the certified EHR technology (CEHRT) 
definitions, which are required to be a meaningful EHR user under the program. Any 
further increase in the length of the EHR reporting period will make it challenging to 
implement new CEHRT updates before the reporting period as ONC/ASTP continues 
to release more frequent CEHRT updates that take time to adopt. 
 
• 
Proposal to modify the Security Risk Analysis Measure  
UPMC supports the additional requirement to conduct Security Risk Management 
during the calendar year. UPMC agrees that it will increase accountability for reducing 
risks and vulnerabilities to ePHI as required by the HIPAA Security Rule. Since the 
prevalence of significant cybersecurity incidents and ransomware/malware attacks 
 
Page 5 
against healthcare systems has increased in recent years, many eligible hospitals and 
CAHs have already taken steps to prepare for and manage these risks and have 
relevant policies and procedures in place, so this additional component of the 
measure should already be met in many organizations that are already proactively 
protecting against these threats to patient safety and information security. For those 
organizations that have not adopted these risk management practices, the extra 
accountability will help ensure ePHI is adequately protected at those organizations. 
 
• 
Proposal to modify the SAFER Guides Measure  
UPMC appreciates that CMS addressed commenters concerns about the relevancy of 
the 2016 SAFER Guides given the rapid advancement of Health IT since then. The new 
version will be more helpful for organizations to use than the outdated version. 
However, UPMC still questions why CMS has inconsistent SAFER Guides measure 
requirements for eligible clinicians attesting to the Merit-based Incentive Payment 
System (MIPS) and eligible hospitals/CAHs attesting to the Medicare Promoting 
Interoperability Program. Eligible clinicians are required to attest yes to having 
completed only one specific SAFER Guide, whereas hospitals must attest yes to having 
completed all the SAFER Guides. UPMC recommends CMS implement an incremental 
transition period regarding the number of new 2025 version Guides required for 
eligible hospitals/CAHs to complete each year. For instance, CMS could consider 
incrementally adding the Guide groups over 3 years: Foundational Guides in 2026, 
Foundational Guides and Infrastructure Guides in 2027, Foundational Guides and 
Infrastructure Guides and Clinical Process Guides in 2028. It takes significant time and 
resources to adequately complete each Guide. For example, in one year, UPMC’s 
SAFER Guides assessment for all 9 2016 version SAFER Guides took over 6 months and 
involved over 65 team members across 25 departments to properly and fully 
complete them all. Since organizations can expect to expend similar effort on the new 
version of the SAFER Guides as they have in the past, having additional time to 
familiarize ourselves with the new guides would significantly reduce the burden of 
having to complete all the new Guides so soon after they were introduced.  
 
• 
Proposal to modify the Public Health and Clinical Data Exchange Objective: 
Adoption of an Optional Bonus Measure for Public Health Reporting using the 
TEFCA 
UPMC is supportive of the proposed optional bonus measure for submitting health 
information to public health agencies through TEFCA starting in 2026. This can benefit 
early adopters of TEFCA (especially those early adopters who are also already 
exchanging data with a PHA under a TEFCA agreement), and could encourage others 
to participate in TEFCA, which would further advance interoperability across the 
nation. 
 
• 
Requests for Information: 
Performance Based Measures in the Public Health and Clinical Data Exchange 
Objective 
UPMC has concerns with the proposed transition to performance-based 
measures for the Public Health and Clinical Data Exchange objective. Given the 
 
Page 6 
high level of variation in what data elements each public health agency (PHA) 
wants to receive from healthcare organizations, it would be difficult to be 
consistent in reporting on “data completeness” if a hospital reports for a single 
measure to multiple PHAs with differing data collection requirements, even with 
a defined minimum set of data elements. While timeliness of reporting could be 
a valuable measure for PHAs for measures that leverage real-time interfaces, 
some measures like the Antimicrobial Usage and Antimicrobial Resistance 
measures can involve a manual upload process making timeliness less of a 
valuable metric (or the metric would be calculated differently than interface-
based measures, causing added complexity). Lastly, some organizations rely on 
multiple different health IT vendors to support meeting the various public health 
measures and would therefore need to maintain measure reports from each 
vendor, causing a more complicated performance tracking process than is 
necessary. 
 
UPMC could potentially be interested in the use of FHIR APIs to consolidate 
disparate EHR functions that support different types of public health data 
exchange, provided that sufficient time is allotted to fully developing public 
health-based FHIR specifications and allowing health IT developers, healthcare 
organizations, and PHAs to properly implement them. As stated previously in this 
comment letter, CMS should consider the significant amount of cost, time, and 
effort required to transition from one technology standard to another.  
 
 
Toward Digital Quality Measurement in CMS Quality Programs—Request for 
Information 
 
• 
Timeline under consideration for FHIR-based eCQM reporting 
UPMC understands CMS’s desire to accelerate the modernization of the quality 
reporting process. As we’ve commented on in the past, any major transitions to 
new technology standards takes significant time, which includes development 
and delivery from health IT vendors and review, testing, implementation, and 
adoption by healthcare organizations. A conversion of this magnitude could take 
health IT vendors several years, so any new FHIR-based eCQM standard 
requirements should take this into account before releasing a deadline for 
implementation after an effective date of the reporting requirement. A 24-
month timeline is probably not long enough if it includes the time it will take for 
health IT vendors to develop and certify their products before healthcare 
organizations are able to test, implement, and potentially change workflows. 
However, if the FHIR-based eCQM specifications are ready prior to starting the 
24-month timeline, then this could be a reasonable timeframe. 
 
A challenge UPMC foresees with the reporting timeline of FHIR-based eCQMs 
involves the substantial strain on UPMC’s IT and quality staff resources to 
complete concurrent data validation of the same measures with 2 reporting 
formats while also diligently working to meet the aggressive and progressive 
 
Page 7 
increase in the number of new eCQMs required from prior rulemaking. If the 
same staffing resources implement, support, and validate eCQMs, hybrid 
measures, and other IQR and OQR measures, in addition to performing 
numerous other duties, then having at least a two-year transition period would 
be helpful.  
 
The transition from QRDA to FHIR-based eCQMs will involve significant costs to 
healthcare providers along with further burden on staff as described above since 
healthcare organizations would expect to continue QRDA eCQM reporting while 
at the same time modifying their systems to prepare for FHIR-based eCQMs.  To 
encourage and facilitate early adoption prior to mandatory FHIR-based eCQM 
reporting, CMS should financially incentivize healthcare providers to voluntarily 
be early adopters.  
 
Proposed changes to the Transforming Episode Accountability Model (TEAM) 
• 
New Hospitals in Mandated CBSA 
CMS is proposing to establish a cutoff date after which new hospitals and hospitals 
that begin to meet a definition of a TEAM participant and are located in a mandated 
CBSA would not be required to participate immediately in the TEAM and would have 
a limited deferment period before beginning their participation in the model. UPMC 
agrees with allowing one full performance year of deferment before participation. 
UPMC would also support allowing these facilities to start the participation in a track 
1 status to allow for familiarity with the program without risk. 
 
• 
Safety Net Hospitals  
UPMC appreciates CMS’ flexibility in allowing designated hospital types that are 
eligible for Track 2 to continue in the model with limited two-sided risk. Given that a 
healthcare facilities status can change year over year influenced by patient 
demographics, healthcare policies related to Medicaid eligibility, and economic 
conditions, it could be difficult for a mandated facility to be aware of which track 
they would be eligible for in any given year of the model. UPMC would encourage 
CMS to provide clarity on the ability of hospitals whose status as a safety net hospital 
may fluctuate year over year to participate at the same level as the previous year for 
the year in which the status changes plus one full performance cycle after the status 
change. For example, if a hospital meets safety net criteria in year two of the model 
and participates as a track 2 facility for that model year but then experiences a status 
change in which they are no longer designed as a safety net hospital for year 3 
because they did not serve a large enough number of patient who are insured by 
Medicaid, UPMC would ask CMS to consider allowing that facility to still continue in 
track 2 throughout the year 3 time frame and for one full participation year after that 
so as to not put vulnerable hospitals in jeopardy of higher losses. This would be 
particularly important should there be significant changes to current Medicaid 
healthcare policy development. 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 
• 
Quality Measures  
UPMC very much appreciates CMS’s effort to align quality measures across CMS 
programs to minimize administrative reporting burden. UPMC appreciates the 
complexity CMS faces in balancing patient safety, administrative efficiency, and data 
accuracy in measure reporting. In previous rule making CMS has proposed and 
finalized the inclusion of three measures to beginning in performance year 2 of 
TEAM. Some of these measures are relatively new to hospitals, having only been 
included in the IQR programs for one year. Hospitals will still be in the process of 
becoming familiar with the measures and having them applied to TEAM where 
hospitals can occur monetary losses based on their performance seems to place 
hospital in a vulnerable position. 
 
Alignment of the Hybrid Hospital-Wide Readmission Measure to the IQR Program 
The HWR measure combines both claims data with electronic health record data to 
risk adjust the hospital readmission rates. The timeline for the inclusion of the HWR 
into the IQR program has changed and in the CY 2025 Hospital OPPS final rule CMS 
allowed for continued voluntary reporting of the clinical electronic record sourced 
data elements. CMS has recognized that the clinical data elements presented a 
collection burden for hospitals and has responded with substantive changes to the 
reporting thresholds and collection criteria. UPMC would request for CMS to consider 
an alternative implementation plan for this measure into TEAM and only consider 
calculating performance on the claims-based aspects of the measure for the first 
inclusion year. This modification would make the measure not aligned perfectly with 
the IQR reporting but would be able to capture data that is already available to CMS 
via claims, thus decreasing any further reporting burden on hospitals. 
 
Information Transfer Patient Reported Outcome – Performance Measure (PRO-PM) 
CMS is proposing to introduce this measure to TEAM for all episode categories that 
are initiated in the hospital outpatient departments. CMS has also stated intent to 
continue to incorporate more Patient reported outcome measures (PRO-PMs) into 
value-based models as they provide valuable insights into the patient’s perspective of 
the care they received during the episode. UPMC has long valued the voice of the 
patient in the care experience and supports the addition of PRO-PMs into this and 
future payment models. However, the AHA has highlighted challenges in 
implementing this new measure, including the need for adequate training and 
resources for accurate collection. UPMC agrees with the AHA and takes this 
opportunity to express concern around the ability of hospitals to invest resources 
both human resources and technology advancements into accurately capturing and 
reporting PRO-PMs. Accuracy in reporting requires a robust system process and 
workflow to ensure high response rates, this type of response is crucial for accuracy 
and takes time to hard wired into system processes. We would ask CMS to delay the 
inclusion of the Transfer PRO measure for a year from the year 3 proposed time 
frame to allow hospitals time to become familiar with the measure and develop 
workflows that can set them up for success in reporting before being scored on their 
performance in a two-sided risk model. 
 
 
Page 9 
Lack of Quality Measurement Data 
CMS has recognized that some quality measures in TEAM fall under an optional 
reporting status in other CMS programs, therefore creating the situation where some 
hospitals in TEAM will not have quality measure data for TEAM required quality 
measures. Particularly the Hospital Harm-falls with Injury and Hospital Harm- Post 
operative Respiratory failure eCQM measures that are available for self-selection in 
the IQR program. Not having this data would make calculating the CQS difficult, if not 
impossible. As a result, TEAM participants could be penalized for lack of a quality 
measure that does not indicate the quality of the care they have provided.  CMS is 
proposing that facilities without quality data would be assigned a neutral measure 
score of 50. This practice is similar to the methodology for low volume hospitals that 
participated in the CJR model. Based on historical perspective with minimal downside 
impact to scores, UPMC supports this proposal. 
 
• 
Pricing Methodology 
CMS has proposed a 3-step approach to the construction of preliminary target prices 
when there are MS-DRG or HCPCS/APC changes while capturing the potential year-
to-year variation in patient cohort composition based on the changes. Most DRG 
changes are implemented in a Federal fiscal year timeline starting October 1 of a 
given year. Since TEAM prices are constructed based on a calendar year 
performance, quarter four changes may not be appropriately accounted for in the 
calculations. However, constructing two levels of target pricing for one performance 
year is also undesirable and would increase program complexity.  UPMC would ask 
that if CMS moves forward with the 3-step process that consideration for benchmark 
pricing also be applied to keep a consistent cohort. 
 
• 
Prospective Trend Factor and Normalization Factor Proposals 
CMS is proposing to implement a change to the preliminary target pricing calculation. 
The proposal is to change the calculation of the prospective trend factor from a 
percentage change based between BY 1 and BY 3 to an annual percentage change 
calculated using a linear regression model. CMS is also proposing to add 2 additional 
years of episode spending data into the prospective trend factor calculation. This 
change may seem subtle and technical but has potential for big implications. The new 
methodology would project baselines into future performance years using broader 
market trends and longer trend periods. UPMC does feel that this process would 
improve the reliability of target prices but would CMS to monitor for unintended 
target changes that might negatively impact hospitals. CMS is also proposing to 
update the language in the rule to clarify that the prospective normalization factor 
will be calculated using the benchmark prices rather than using the preliminary 
target prices. This calculation would ensure that the total risk-adjusted benchmark 
price does not exceed the average of the non-risk adjusted benchmark price. The 
American Medical Association (AMA) has commented on the normalization factor in 
TEAM, emphasizing its role in ensuring that hospital spending is comparable across 
different markets, allowing hospitals to be evaluated on the same scale as others in 
the same market. UPMC also supports this calculation and recognizes the importance 
of fair reimbursement to avoid unintended financial burdens on providers. 
 
Page 10 
• 
Risk Adjustment 
CMS is proposing a 180 day look back for each beneficiary, beginning with the day 
prior to the anchor hospitalization or anchor procedure to determine which HCC flags 
or and to determine the HCC episode specific flags as well as the TEAM HCC count. 
This is consistent with the methodology adopted into later years of the BPCI 
Advanced programs and therefore UPMC supports moving this longer look back 
forward. UPMC would also advocate for CMS to consider a full year look back as 
some critical chronic HCCs are only documented on a yearly basis yet may have 
significant impact on a patient’s risk score. CMS is also proposing to adopt HCC v. 28 
to identify the episode category specific HCC risk adjusters. This is consistent with the 
adoption of HCC v. 28 in other CMS models as well and UPMC supports this proposal. 
 
• 
Low Episode Volume Hospitals 
To help reduce pricing volatility and limit financial risk UPMC strongly encourages 
CMS to adopt a threshold for low episode volume exclusion rather than the current 
proposal of no low volume episode policy. UPMC would like to advocate for the low 
volume threshold of 31 episodes. The low volume policies should also apply to 
benchmarking calculations. UPMC does not support the consideration of only 
applying the low volume exclusion to safety net and rural hospitals, as this practice 
would unfairly disadvantage other low volume hospitals in the model. 
 
• 
Health Data Reporting 
CMS is proposing to eliminate the previously finalized requirement for submission of 
health equity plans and voluntary collection of health -related social needs screening 
and reporting from TEAM. UPMC supports the removal but emphasizes the Society of 
Hospital Medicine’s statement in recognizing that “the removal of health equity 
measures, while reducing reporting burden, may negatively impact the quality of 
care for marginalized communities. Marginalized communities often face systemic 
barriers to healthcare including socioeconomic challenges, biases, and limited access 
to resources. Removing measures that focus on social needs and health equity can 
exacerbate disparities leading to poorer health outcomes.” UPMC remains 
committed to equitable care for all patients.  
 
• 
Referral to Primary Care Services 
CMS has offered multiple considerations for ensuring a successful transition back to 
primary care services after an episode. While UPMC strongly supports the 
collaborative effort of specialty care and primary care providers we do agree with 
CMS that requiring the referral in the model adds unnecessary administrative burden 
to the reporting burden process. Based on this information, we do ask CMS to 
consider removing the requirement from the TEAM model. As CMS points out many 
TEAM participants already have the mechanisms in place to refer the beneficiaries 
back to their preferred supplier of primary care services. We also recognize that the 
expertise of the surgeon is critical in managing the immediate post operative period 
and that suppliers of primary care services, who may not be familiar with specialty 
care, may refer a patient to seek emergency room assessments for wound care 
 
Page 11 
increasing spending when the specialist may advise a different course of assessment 
for a patient wound concern. 
 
• 
3-Day SNF Waiver 
UPMC applauds CMS’s proposal to allow TEAM participants to use the TEAM SNF 3-
day waiver for TEAM beneficiaries discharged to hospitals and CAHs providing post-
acute care under swing bed arrangements. This shows progressive thinking and can 
reduce episode spending. 
 
• 
Decarbonization and Resilience 
UPMC supports CMS’ proposal to remove the health equity and decarbonization-
related reporting from the TEAM program.  We appreciate CMS’ recognition of the 
need to streamline program requirements and allow hospitals to focus on other 
critical aspects of the TEAM implementation and success. While these reporting 
elements are being removed from the model, UPMC remains fully committed to 
reducing our environmental impact.  We will continue to pursue initiatives that 
contribute to a more sustainable healthcare system. 
 
 
Thank you for your consideration of UPMC’s comments on the IPPS proposed rule for Federal 
Fiscal Year 2026.  UPMC looks forward to further dialogue with CMS.  For questions, please 
contact me at 412-647-1602 or minnierte@upmc.edu.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Tami Minnier, MSN, RN, FACHE, FAAN 
Senior Vice President, Health Services Division & 
Chief Quality and Operational Excellence Officer, UPMC 
