 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 10, 2025 
 
Dr. Mehmet Oz, M.D. 
Administrator    
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services  
Department of Health & Human Services 
 
Submitted electronically to: http://www.regulations.gov 
 
Re:  CMS-1808-P: Medicare and Medicaid Programs and the Children’s Health Insurance Program; 
Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems for Acute Care Hospitals and the Long-Term Care 
Hospital Prospective Payment System and Policy Changes and Fiscal Year 2025 Rates; Quality 
Programs Requirements; and Other Policy Changes 
 
Dear Administrator Oz: 
 
On behalf of University of Vermont Health Network (UVMHN), I am writing to provide comments to 
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) on the fiscal year (FY) 2026 Inpatient 
Prospective Payment System (IPPS) proposed rule, which was published in the April 30, 2025 Federal 
Register. 
 
UVM Health Network shares CMS’s commitment to transforming America’s health care system to 
ensure patients have access to high-quality care in their communities. However, we have significant 
concerns over continued payment updates that fail to account for rising labor costs, inflation and 
tariffs, all of which threaten the resiliency of our hospital network and its providers.  
 
Market Basket Update 
 
CMS proposes to rebase and revise the IPPS market basket to a 2023-base year beginning in FY 2026 
using Medicare cost reports that began on or after October 1, 2022, and before October 1, 2023. 
Based on its standard methodology for updating the hospital market basket, CMS proposes to 
update IPPS operating payments for FY 2026 based on a forecasted 3.2% increase to the hospital 
market basket. After accounting for the -0.8% adjustment for productivity, which is double that of 
previous years, CMS estimates that operating payments will increase by 2.4% in FY 2026. 
 
UVM Health Network is very concerned that Medicare payments to hospitals are insufficient to meet 
the cost of care, resulting in cost shifting to commercial payers and consumers of health insurance. 
MedPAC shares this concern and has recommended a market basket increase plus 1%, equaling a 
PPS hospital update of 4.6%. MedPAC tracks a group of relatively efficient hospitals, and those 
hospitals generated a -2% median Medicare margin in FY 2023. These hospitals consistently achieve 
 
 
2 
 
high quality outcomes at a lower cost than the average PPS hospital. The median Medicare margin for 
all PPS hospitals in FY 2023 was -13%, according to MedPAC in its December 2024 meeting.  
 
Labor expenses, inflation, and other outside factors continue to increase operating costs for 
hospitals, further contributing to the hospitals’ financial instability.  Medicare payments to hospitals 
conintue to be insufficient and will jeopardize their ability to keep doors open for the patients who 
rely on them.  To develop a more accurate payment update that reflects the actual cost of providing 
care, it is critical for CMS to adopt additional data elements in its calculation of the IPPS market 
basket. 
 
It is imperative that CMS leverage its full statutory authority to make appropriate adjustments to the 
market basket in response to exogenous events and extraordinary circumstances as recommended 
by MedPAC. 
 
Hospital Wage Index for Acute Care Hospitals 
 
CMS proposes to continue with the discontinued low-wage hospital index policy in FY 2026, just as it 
did for FY 2025, with a transitional adjustment for low-wage index hospitals. Under this proposal, if a 
hospital’s proposed FY 2026 wage index decreases by more than 9.75% compared to FY 2024, then 
the transitional FY 2026 wage index would equal  90.25% of its FY 2024 wage index. The limit on the 
reduction in the wage index for a low wage-index hospital would be 5% annually in FY 2025 and FY 
2026 (or 9.75% over two years) due to the 5% cap on year-to-year decreases that was adopted in the 
FY 2023 IPPS rule. CMS proposes to apply the transitional policy in a budget neutral manner. 
 
We appreciate CMS's recognition of a shortcoming in the wage index methodology, which has been 
detrimental to hospitals - especially rural hospitals - located in areas with depressed wages. UVM 
Health Network is generally supportive of the narrow transitional policy to address hospitals that are 
most affected by the discontinuation of the low-wage index hospital policy; however, CMS should not 
apply the narrow transitional policy in a budget neutral manner. 
 
Changes to the TEAM Model 
 
We are pleased to see that CMS continues to refine the TEAM model in response to public 
comments. Since it was finalized in 2024, many hospitals have invested time and money in 
preparation of TEAM’s launch in 2026. 
 
UVM Health Network offers these general comments on the TEAM Model: 
- 
We support adding the “Information Transfer PRO-PM” measure in TEAM performance years 
3–5, applicable to joint replacement and spinal fusion. 
- 
We recommend extending the lookback period to one year to fully capture patients' risk 
profiles, especially for those with earlier annual visits. We also recommend accounting for 
both Hierarchical Condition Category (HCC) weights and counts, including HCCs identified 
during the episode. 
- 
We recommend using the episode end date for both attribution and reconciliation. Using the 
discharge date could delay reconciliation for episodes ending after year-end. 
 
 
3 
 
- 
We support extending the SNF 3 day waiver to include swing bed arrangements in hospitals 
and CAHs for TEAM beneficiaries, as this expands access to Post Accute Care (PAC) in 
rural/underserved areas and maintains parity among providers. 
- 
We recommend establishing a low-volume policy using a threshold of 40 episodes per 
category in the baseline. Low-volume hospitals should remain in Track 1 and avoid 
mandatory Track 2. Small case counts create high volatility and risk of financial harm. 
- 
We recommend adding a “Standard User” role in the Data Portal to allow data custodians to 
delegate access, reducing administrative burden and enabling analytics teams to perform 
their work. 
- 
We recommend adjusting episode target prices to reflect unexpected medical supply/device 
cost increases (e.g., tariffs), especially for device-heavy episodes like CABG and spinal 
fusion. 
 
Quality Reporting Programs 
 
A.  Hospital Quality Reporting (IQR) Program and Value Based Purchasing (VBP) Program 
 
Starting with FY 2027, CMS proposes refinements to two measures; MORT-30-STK: 30-day all-cause 
mortality after acute ischemic stroke and COMP-HIP-KNEE: Risk-standardized complication rate 
after elective hip/knee arthroplasty.  The proposed refinements are: 
- 
Include Medicare Advantage (MA) patients, doubling cohort size. 
- 
Shorten performance period from three years to two years. 
- 
Maintain current exclusions (e.g., hospice enrollment, discharge against medical advice). 
CMS also proposes technical updates to seven measures beginning with FY 2027, as well as 
proposing two technical measure updates for FY 2027 that include: 
- 
Transition risk adjustment from HCCs to ICD-10 codes for better precision. 
- 
Remove COVID-19 exclusions, due to the end of the Public Health Emergency (PHE). 
 
Additionally, CMS proposes removing four measures due to high burden and low utility: 
- 
Hospital Commitment to Health Equity (HCHE) 
- 
COVID-19 Vaccination Coverage Among Healthcare Personnel 
- 
SDOH-1: Screening for Social Drivers of Health 
- 
SDOH-2: Screen Positive Rate for SDOH 
 
Lastly CMS proposes changes to the reporting and submission requirements for hybrid measures 
that starting in FY 2028 that include: 
- 
Lower reporting thresholds: from 90% to 70% (CCDEs) and 95% to 70% (linking variables). 
- 
Allow more missing data: up to two missing lab results and two vital signs. 
 
UVM Health Network supports both proposals for the measure refinements including maintating 
current exclusions and shortening the reporting period, however we urge CMS to ensure the quality of 
MA data that is being used and caution against reliance on low-quality data. 
 
UVM Health Network supports the technical measure updates but recommends maintaining an 
active diagnosis of COVID-19 as a risk variable where relevant. 
 
 
 
4 
 
UVM Health Network generally supports the proposal of the four measures being removed, however, 
hospitals should not be penalized for anticipating regulatory requirements, and we strongly urge CMS 
to avoid retroactive effective dates when proposing to remove measures, especially for relatively new 
measures, as it places undue burden on hospitals. 
UVM Health Network supports the proposal involving reporting and submission requirements for 
hybrid measures and agrees with CMS that it will allow more hospitals to meet the reporting 
thresholds and will reduce the reporting burden for hospitals.   
 
B.  Hospital Readmission Reduction Program (HRRP) 
 
CMS proposes refinements to six readmission measures under the Hospital Readmissions 
Reduction Program (HRRP): 
- 
30-Day Readmission Rate After Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI) 
- 
30-Day Readmission Rate After Heart Failure (HF) 
- 
30-Day Readmission Rate After Pneumonia (PN) 
- 
30-Day Readmission Rate After Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) 
- 
30-Day Readmission Rate After Total Hip/Knee Arthroplasty (THA/TKA) 
- 
30-Day Readmission Rate After Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) 
 
Like IQR above, CMS again proposes to include Medicare Advantage (MA) beneficiaries in each 
measure cohort while shortening the performance period from three years to two years. 
 
Additionally CMS proposes similar technical changes by removing all COVID-19-related exclusions, 
including: index and readmission exclusions for COVID-19 diagnoses, ICD-10 codes for secondary 
COVID-19 diagnoses and risk adjustment for history of COVID-19 within 12 months. 
 
UVM Health Network supports all proposed changes, aligning with its earlier support for IQR 
refinements, but we recommend CMS integrate risk from COVID-19 history into updated risk 
adjustment models to avoid penalizing hospitals for potential increased risk in affected patients. 
 
C.  Promoting Interoperability Program 
 
CMS is requesting information  on the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) Measure; 
Specifically, CMS seeks feedback on: 
- 
Transitioning the measure to a performance-based format (numerator/denominator). 
- 
Expanding the drug types covered by the measure. 
 
CMS is considering the following descriptions for the measure: 
- 
Denominator: Number of Schedule II/III/IV drugs electronically prescribed using CEHRT. 
- 
Numerator: Number of those prescriptions for which the PDMP was queried via CEHRT at the 
time of prescribing. 
 
While we support performance-based measures, we would like to highlight major operational 
barriers.  First, PDMP–EHR integration is inconsistent across hospitals, and many EHRs cannot 
automatically capture PDMP queries. Additionally, many rural hospitals and Critical Access 
Hospitals (CAHs) will find this measure particular challenging. 
 
 
 
5 
 
UVM Health Network believes the proposal for the PDMP measures is premature and that CMS 
should convene stakeholders and experts to examine if PDMP queries reduce opioid prescribing. 
CMS should also evaluate the effectiveness before mandating a performance-based measure.  If 
CMS does decide to move forward, the measure should be optional and eligible for bonus points 
until data and interoperability standards are fully supported. 
 
CMS is also requesting information on data quality. Specifically, CMS seeks input on how to improve 
data quality in electronic health information (EHI) exchanges to reduce risks to patient safety, public 
health, and research due to poor data quality. 
 
UVM Health Network would like to note operational barriers around the current health IT ecosystem, 
as it lags behind current needs.  EHRs are focused on transactional care, not population health or 
longitudinal data.  Promoting Interoperability Program and legacy Meaningful Use definitions 
continue to be outdated. Data exchanges remain fragmented, and EHR vendors often limit access to 
bulk data, stifling innovation. Significant time and resources are required for data extraction, usually 
involving third-party vendors. 
 
There needs to be a fundamental shift in how CMS defines and supports health IT in order to enable a 
modern and data -driven health care system focusd on improving outcomes. UVM Health Network 
recommends that CMS focus on a way to leverage the Promoting Interoperability Program to help 
make data more accessible for quality improvement and population health activities, which would 
help improve patient outcomes while improving efficiency and reducing costs in health care. 
Modifying the certification standards for health IT, meaningful use criteria and overall incentives to 
include data usability and availability for quality, benchmarking, and process improvement activities 
would unlock the potential of health care data.   
 
D.  RFI: Toward Digital Quality Measurement in CMS Quality Program 
 
CMS is seeking public input on its proposed transition to FHIR-based electronic clinical quality 
measures (eCQMs) across its quality programs (e.g., HIQR, HOQR, and Promoting Interoperability), 
with the goal of supporting greater digital interoperability and quality measurement.  
 
As noted above in the previous sections,  existing health IT and interoperability rules are outdated 
and no longer align with modern health care data needs.  Additionally, the regulatory framework (e.g., 
meaningful use, ONC rules) emphasizes compliance over innovation and hampers efficient data use 
for AI, analytics, and care coordination. 
 
CMS should take care that any requirements – or interoperability mechanisms developed to promote 
eCQM reporting – do not complicate bulk data sharing for other crucial purposes, such as patient 
care coordination, analytics, AI or benchmarking to understand care or cost opportunities. There is a 
danger that developing infrastructure solely for FHIR-based eCQMs could detract from broader 
interoperability goals, and health care needs a unified, scalable data-sharing approach – not 
piecemeal compliance solutions. Current EHR and hybrid measures struggle with data inconsistency 
across systems and without uniform calibration and definitions (e.g., for lab results), quality 
measurement risks being unreliable and potentially unfair if linked to payment. 
 
UVM Health Network recommends a 4-year transition period instead of the CMS proposed 2-year 
period to address any troubleshooting and implementation delays within EHRs and to allow those 
 
 
6 
 
hospitals and providers in rural or low-resource settings more time to implement changes. Future 
investments should prioritize hospital readiness, not just vendor capabilities while addressing and 
limiting information blocking by EHR vendors that restrict third-party access to data. 
 
UVM Health Network urges that CMS’s efforts on interoperability must be focused on simplification 
and standardization across reporting and use cases, and that CMS must avoid creating separate 
mechanisms for each program or goal and instead push toward true, universal interoperability. 
 
Conclusion 
 
UVM Health Network thanks HHS for allowing us the opportunity to submit public comment on the FY 
2026 IPPS proposed rule.  We look forward to continuing to work with CMS on developing policies 
that help transform America’s health care system so that hospitals and health systems can continue 
to ensure patients have access to high-quality care in their communities. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Kelly Champney 
Vice President, Revenue Strategy and Performance 
University of Vermont Health Network 
 
 
