 
Heidi L. Gartland 
Chief Government & Community Relations Officer 
11100 Euclid Avenue, MPV6003 
Cleveland, OH 44122 
216.844.3985 
Heidi.Gartland@UHhospitals.org 
 
 
June 10, 2025 
 
 
Dr. Mehmet Oz 
Administrator 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Attention: CMS-1833-P 
7500 Security Boulevard 
Baltimore, MD 21244-1850 
 
Re: Medicare Program; Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems for Acute Care Hospitals and 
the Long-Term Care Hospital Prospective Payment System and Policy Changes and Fiscal Year 2026 
Rates; Requirements for Quality Programs; and Other Policy Changes (CMS-1833-P) 
 
Dear Administrator Oz,  
 
University Hospitals, Cleveland, Ohio (UH) welcomes this opportunity to comment on the proposed rule 
entitled “Medicare Program; Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems for Acute Care Hospitals 
and the Long-Term Care Hospital Prospective Payment System and Policy Changes and Fiscal Year 2026 
Rates; Requirements for Quality Programs; and Other Policy Changes,” 90 Fed. Reg. 18002 (April 30, 
2025), issued by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS or the agency).   
 
Founded in 1866, University Hospitals serves the needs of patients through an integrated network of 21 
hospitals (including five joint ventures), more than 50 health centers and outpatient facilities, and over 
200 physician offices in 16 counties throughout northern Ohio. The system’s flagship quaternary care, 
academic medical center, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, is affiliated with Case Western 
Reserve University School of Medicine, Northeast Ohio Medical University, Oxford University, the 
Technion Israel Institute of Technology and National Taiwan University College of Medicine. The main 
campus also includes the UH Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital, ranked among the top children’s 
hospitals in the nation; UH MacDonald Women's Hospital, Ohio's only hospital for women; and UH 
Seidman Cancer Center, part of the NCI-designated Case Comprehensive Cancer Center. UH is home to 
some of the most prestigious clinical and research programs in the nation, with more than 3,000 active 
clinical trials and research studies underway. UH Cleveland Medical Center is perennially among the 
highest performers in national ranking surveys, including “America’s Best Hospitals” from U.S. News & 
World Report. UH is also home to 19 Clinical Care Delivery and Research Institutes. UH is one of the 
largest employers in Northeast Ohio with more than 30,000 employees. 
 
 
Pg 2 
 
The following summary reflects UH’s comments on CMS’ proposals regarding graduate medical 
education payments, hospital payment, quality proposals, and requests for information (RFIs) in the 
Fiscal Year (FY) 2026 Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) Proposed Rule. 
• 
Graduate Medical Education Provisions. UH thanks CMS for restating and clarifying FTE 
determinations for cost reporting periods other than twelve months.   
• 
Market Basket Update. Increase the market basket update to account for increased costs, 
particularly the effect of tariffs on hospital supply costs.   
• 
Disproportionate Share Hospital and Uncompensated Care Payments. Increase 
transparency related to the calculation of the “other” factor in the Factor 1 calculation.  
Account for the potential of higher rates of uninsured individuals in Factor 2. 
• 
Labor Related Share: Ensure accuracy and transparency in the methodology and data used to 
calculate the labor-related share of the IPPS base payment.  
• 
Low Wage Index Policy: Evaluate factors negatively affecting wages at low wage index 
hospitals and establish policies to support these hospitals without harming high wage index 
hospitals.  
• 
CAR-T: Further refine policies to ensure payment for CAR T-Cell therapies are adequate by 
considering both standardized drug costs and diagnostic codes to correctly identify CAR T-
Cell therapy clinical trial cases. 
• 
Cross-Cutting Revision to Quality Program Extraordinary Circumstances Policies: Adopt 
an intermediate form of relief for hospitals experiencing extraordinary circumstances that 
temporarily affect their ability to submit timely data. 
• 
Transition to Digital Quality Measures RFI: Share information on hospital testing and 
feasibility to report FHIR-based measures and ensure a sufficient timeline for all hospitals to 
successfully transition to FHIR-based measures. 
• 
Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program: Do not introduce unfair measurement and 
payment bias into the program by adding Medicare Advantage patients and payment data into 
performance measurement and fee-for-service penalty calculations. 
• 
Inpatient Quality Reporting Program: Finalize the removal of measures from the program, 
modify hybrid measure EHR-derived data reporting threshold requirements, and consider 
further delay of the mandatory reporting period for hybrid EHR reporting based on analysis 
of hospital experience with the July 2024 – June 2025 voluntary reporting period. 
• 
Transforming Episode Accountability Model: Use the Community Deprivation Index for 
beneficiary-level economic risk adjustment, ensure adequate risk adjustment by extending the 
hierarchical condition categories lookback period, establish a low-volume threshold with no 
downside financial risk, implement a consistent, well-tested set of quality metrics for the 
duration of the model, and refine the primary care services referral requirement to improve 
patient access to care and outcomes. 
 
GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PROVISIONS  
UH thanks CMS for restating and clarifying its longstanding policies used to determine FTE counts and 
caps for Direct Graduate Medical Education (DGME) and Indirect Medical Education (IME) 
reimbursements in cost reporting periods other than twelve months. Because no resident may be counted 
as more than 1.0 full-time equivalent (FTE) in a twelve-month period, certain adjustments to the standard 
twelve-month FTE determination must be made in cost reporting periods other than twelve months. 1 
Pg 3 
 
While CMS is not proposing a new policy for determining FTE counts or caps in nonstandard cost 
reporting periods, the transparency and public evaluation of the current policies is welcomed by the 
academic medicine community. Also, CMS’s commitment to listen to stakeholders is helpful to refine the 
overall efficacy of these policies. If stakeholders raise legitimate concerns about this or other policies, 
CMS should thoughtfully consider their feedback and remain responsive to their input.  
 
PAYMENT PROPOSALS 
 
PROPOSED MARKET BASKET UPDATE 
 
Increase the Market Basket Update for FY 2026 to Accurately Incorporate Expected Growth in 
Hospital Input Costs 
 
CMS is proposing an increase to the standardized amount of 2.4 percent, reflecting a market basket 
update of positive 3.2 percent and a total factor productivity adjustment of negative 0.8 percentage points 
for FY 2026.1 We are concerned that the data used to calculate the FY 2026 market basket update are not 
representative of the significantly higher growth in labor and supply costs hospitals continue to 
experience and which are expected to rise in FY 2026 due to the widespread effect of tariffs on the supply 
chain. Due to the timing of the projections that the CMS Office of the Actuary used, which was made in 
December 2024, the effects of tariffs on hospital costs are not accounted for in this market basket 
projection. The inadequate proposed FY 2026 update, coupled with market basket updates in preceding 
years that fell short of the actual pace of inflation, necessitate a course correction from CMS to ensure 
Medicare payments are accurately updated to reflect hospital input costs.  
 
The data used to calculate the market basket update do not accurately reflect the dramatic increase in 
labor and supply costs that hospitals and health systems have experienced since FY 2022. Hospitals 
continue to experience substantial annual increases in their expenses, with year-over-year labor expense 
increases at 6 percent and 9 percent for non-labor expenses.2 In its March 2025 report, the Medicare 
Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC) found Medicare fee-for-service margins of negative 13 
percent in 2023, virtually unchanged from the record-low negative 13.1 percent margins in 2022.3 The 
financial outlook for academic health systems is even more grim—University Hospitals lost $185M in 
2023 treating Medicare patients.  We do not see these cost trends lessening in FY 2026 or the foreseeable 
future. On the contrary, in the face of continued economic and supply chain uncertainty stemming from 
tariffs and other external pressures, we expect these conditions to worsen in 2026. In recognition of the 
unabating cost increases hospitals face, MedPAC recommended that to ensure beneficiary access to care 
and hospital access to capital, Congress should direct CMS to provide a payment update 1 percent above 
the market basket update.4 This is the third year in a row that MedPAC has called for an update above the 
market basket update.  
 
The insufficiency of the FY 2026 proposed market basket update is compounded by underestimates by 
CMS in FYs 2022 through 2024 of actual cost increases. As shown below in Figure 1, in comparing 
 
1 Hospitals that successfully report quality measures and are meaningful users of electronic health records are 
eligible for the full payment update.  
2 Kaufman Hall March 2025 National Hospital Flash Report. May 7, 2025. 
https://www.kaufmanhall.com/sites/default/files/2025-05/KH-NHFR-Report_Mar_2025_Metrics.pdf 
3 MedPAC March 2025 Report to Congress. Chapter 3. 
4 MedPAC March 2025 Report to Congress. Chapter 3.  
Pg 4 
 
forecast data CMS uses at the time of the final rule with updated market basket data, it is clear that CMS 
has consistently underestimated market basket updates in recent years, with a staggering three percentage 
point underestimate in FY 2022.  
 
Figure 1: Forecasted Regulation Market Basket Updates vs. Actual Market Basket Updates, FYs 
2022-2024 
 
Source: Forecasted market basket updates are from the respective fiscal year IPPS final rule. Actual 
market basket updates are from CMS published 2024Q4 forecast with historical data through 2024Q3 
(Summary Web Table_2024Q4 available at https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-
reports/medicare-program-rates-statistics/market-basket-data). 
 
The gap between forecasted and actual market data underscores that CMS continues to underestimate 
actual cost increases and thus does not accurately account for true increases in hospital input costs. For 
example, in FY 2022, hospitals experienced record high inflation and significant increases in the costs of 
labor, drugs, and equipment, yet CMS’s market basket update was wholly inadequate in accounting for 
these costs. CMS calculates the market basket based on forecasts rather than actual labor and supply cost 
increases, thus failing to incorporate the challenging circumstances brought on by unprecedented labor, 
supply, and drug cost increases. Therefore, using the current methodology to calculate the payment 
update inaccurately estimates the financial strain hospitals have experienced and will continue to 
experience in FY 2026 and is insufficient to address these cost increases. Furthermore, the effect of 
underestimating the market basket is amplified due to the compounding nature of payment updates, with 
each year’s payment update building on the previous year’s. We recommend CMS look to alternative data 
sources that better reflect true labor and input cost increases in a more timely manner. At a minimum, 
CMS must provide additional publicly available data on the assumptions and inputs that go into 
developing a market basket update.  
 
With the imposition of tariffs, hospitals will inevitably experience significant price increases in FY 2026 
on items such as pharmaceuticals, medical supplies, medical devices, and building materials used in 
2.70%
4.10%
3.30%
5.70%
4.80%
3.60%
0.00%
1.00%
2.00%
3.00%
4.00%
5.00%
6.00%
FY 2022
FY 2023
FY 2024
Forecasted market basket in final rule
Actual market basket update
Pg 5 
 
capital projects.5 Routine supplies such as enteral syringes, which come exclusively from China, are 
subject to a 245 percent tariff.6 Other common supplies and personal protective equipment, such as 
gowns, gloves, and masks, are also subject to tariffs and are routinely imported.7 Experts anticipate that 
tariffs could increase supply costs for health systems by 15 percent over the next six months, with 90 
percent of healthcare supply chain professionals expecting significant disruptions in procurement 
processes.8 While pharmaceuticals are exempt from reciprocal tariffs, the administration has begun 
exploring imposing tariffs on pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical ingredients,9 with President Trump 
indicating pharmaceuticals could soon lose their exemption.10 CMS must ensure that in its final market 
basket update for FY 2026, it appropriately includes the cost increases attributable to tariffs.  
In addition to the inadequate market basket update of 3.2 percent, CMS includes a higher-than usual total 
productivity adjustment of negative 0.8 percentage points, which reduces the net payment update to 2.4 
percent. The proposed productivity adjustment is the largest CMS has used since FY 2019 and is the 
second largest in the 15 years for which CMS has published data.  
 
Figure 2: FYs 2012-2026 Productivity Adjustments  
 
Source: CMS actual regulation market basket updates file. FY 2026 productivity adjustment is from 
proposed rule. Productivity adjustments are subtracted from the market basket update to yield the 
payment update—therefore, larger values in the graph indicate larger reductions.  
 
Productivity adjustments are based on a 10-year rolling average of data CMS acquires from the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics. Because the productivity adjustment has increased significantly, CMS should evaluate 
 
5 Healthcare Dive. Tariffs send healthcare industry into ‘unchartered waters’. April 4, 2025. 
https://www.healthcaredive.com/news/tariffs-aha-med-tech-brace-for-impact/744496/.  
6 Premier. Potential Impacts of Tariffs on Healthcare. Apil 28, 2025. 
https://premierinc.com/newsroom/policy/update-premier-supply-chain-special-report-tariffs 
7 Axios. Hospitals Begin to Grapple with Tariff Fallout. May 1, 2025. https://www.axios.com/2025/05/01/hospitals-
struggle-tariff-impacts 
8 https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/supply-chain/hospital-finance-supply-leaders-predict-15-increase-in-
tariff-related-costs/ 
9 Notice of Request for Public Comments on Section 232 National Security Investigation of Imports of 
Pharmaceuticals and Pharmaceutical Ingredients. 90 FR 15951 (April 16, 2025).  
10 https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/short-reprieve-pharma-commerce-secretary-lutnick-says-drug-tariffs-
come-next-month-or-two 
1
0.7
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.0
0.7
0.3
0.2
0.5
0.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
FY12
FY 13
FY 14
FY 15
FY 16
FY 17
FY 18
FY 19
FY 20
FY 21
FY 22
FY 23
FY 24
FY 25
FY 26
Productivity Adjustment 
(results in reductions in payments)
Pg 6 
 
how the rolling average experienced such a significant increase when compared with the productivity 
adjustments ranging from 0.2 to 0.5 percentage points in the last three years.  
Given the low payment update proposed for FY 2026, coupled with persistent increases in hospitals costs 
that are expected to worsen as tariffs take effect, we call on CMS to utilize its “exceptions and 
adjustments”11 authority to make a one-time adjustment to the FY 2026 hospital update for forecast error 
in the FYs 2022 and 2023 hospital market baskets. Just as CMS has done in recent years for skilled 
nursing facilities (SNFs) and the capital IPPS update to adjust for discrepancies between the projected and 
actual market basket updates, CMS should make an adjustment for IPPS operating costs. Because CMS 
has not traditionally applied a forecast error adjustment in the IPPS, we emphasize this would be a one-
time adjustment to correct for significant underestimates of the market basket update amidst historical 
hospital input cost growth. For the FY 2025 SNF update, CMS finalized a policy to increase the market 
basket update of 3 percent by an additional 1.7 percentage points.12 For the FY 2024 SNF update, CMS 
finalized an increase in the market basket update of 3.0 percent by an additional 3.6 percentage points for 
forecast error in application of the FY 2022 update.13 These adjustments indicate CMS’ acknowledgement 
of the insufficiency of previous years’ market basket updates.  
 
In both payment systems, CMS applied the forecast error adjustment based on previously established 
policy if the difference between the update and the actual rate of inflation using after-the-fact data differs 
by more than a threshold amount (0.5 percentage points for the SNF update and 0.25 percentage points 
for the capital IPPS update). While CMS has not developed an analogous policy for the IPPS operating 
update, we believe such a forecast error adjustment to the FY 2026 IPPS operating update could be 
adopted under CMS’ rulemaking authority.  
 
MEDICARE DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL (DSH) AND UNCOMPENSATED CARE PAYMENTS  
Medicare DSH payments are a vital source of support for academic health systems and teaching hospitals, 
which provide a disproportionate amount of uncompensated care (UC) compared with all hospitals 
nationally..14 The DSH payments UH receives enables us to continue to provide care to our low-income 
patients and offset our high levels of uncompensated care.  
 
Since the Affordable Care Act’s (ACA’s) revised DSH methodology went into effect in 2014, CMS 
makes DSH payments to hospitals in two forms: as empirically justified DSH payments and as UC-based 
DSH payments. A hospital’s empirically justified DSH payment amount is 25 percent of the DSH add-on 
payment it would have received using the traditional DSH formula. The UC-based DSH payment is 
calculated as the product of three factors: Factor 1, which represents 75 percent of aggregate projected 
traditional DSH payments across all eligible hospitals; Factor 2, which is equal to one minus the change 
in the uninsured rate from 2013 (the year before the ACA’s coverage expansions took effect) to the fiscal 
year in question; and Factor 3, which represents each DSH hospital’s UC costs as a proportion of all DSH 
hospitals’ UC costs. By multiplying factors 1 and 2, CMS arrives at the total pool of UC-based DSH 
payments. Multiplying this pool by each hospital’s factor 3 results in the hospital’s individual UC-based 
DSH payment. Each of these factors is dependent on the data sources and assumptions CMS uses to 
calculate them and can vary significantly if those sources or assumptions change.  
 
11 Section 1886(d)(5)(I) of the Social Security Act 
12 89 FR 64048, at 64054 (Aug. 6, 2024).  
13 89 FR 53200, at 53205 (Aug. 7, 2023).  
14 Source: AAMC analysis of a special tabulation of the FY2023 American Hospital Association (AHA) data. 
AAMC membership data, December 2024.  
Pg 7 
 
For FY 2026, CMS estimates Factor 1 (the total pool of DSH funds before it is reduced to reflect the 
change in the uninsured rate) to be $11.843 billion (p.18468). We note that the proposed rule and the 
Medicare DSH supplemental file published by CMS contain a discrepancy in the published Factor 1, with 
the preamble to the proposed rule including a Factor 1 of $11.761 billion (18256). We assume that the 
$11.843 billion is the correct figure but ask that CMS confirm the correct number and ensure it addresses 
the underlying calculation error when it calculates Factor 1 in the final rule. After Factor 2 is applied to 
reflect the changes in the uninsured rate, CMS calculates a total UC-based payment pool of $7.19 billion. 
In comparison to the previous years’ UC-based payment pool, this marks an uptick in the amount of funds 
available for distribution to DSH hospitals.15 Prior to FY 2026, the UC-based payment amounts available 
each year steadily decreased from FYs 2020 to 2025, with a dramatic decline between FY 2021 and FY 
2022. This has raised concerns around the transparency of data used and the inability to validate the 
accuracy of CMS’ overall DSH projections without having full visibility into the inputs that determine 
DSH payments. For example, the effects of the COVID-19 PHE on Medicare discharges, case mix, 
Medicaid enrollment and subsequent disenrollment through determinations, all have an effect on CMS’ 
estimates.  
 
These reductions in DSH payments have proved problematic for hospitals as we continue to incur 
significant amounts of uncompensated care, face unprecedented cost and workforce pressures, and brace 
for coverage losses and associated increases in uncompensated care resulting from regulatory and 
legislative changes. Going forward, CMS must ensure robust, accurate, and transparent calculations of 
DSH payments so that they remain a sustainable source of funding for hospitals treating low-income 
patients and are protected from large swings attributable to fluctuations in the uninsured rate or 
inaccuracies in CMS’ projections.  
 
Provide Greater Transparency Around “Other” Factors Used to Determine Factor 1 
 
CMS utilized the Office of the Actuary’s (OACT’s) January 2025 Medicare DSH estimates that were 
based on the December 2024 Hospital Cost Report Information System (HCRIS) update and the FY 2025 
IPPS/LTCH PPS final rule impact file to estimate Factor 1 (p.18256). CMS bases these estimates on 
OACT’s Part A benefits projection model which creates a baseline for Factor 1 and is then updated using 
a number of additional factors including annual Medicare payment updates, discharges, case mix, and 
“other” factors (p. 18257). For FY 2026, CMS notes some of the “other” factors applied to Factor 1 
include payment rate adjustments that are not reflected elsewhere in the applied factors but does not 
specify what these entail. CMS is not comprehensive in its explanation of the “other” factors and does not 
detail what data is utilized for this or how it is applied (p.18257). CMS also references changed Medicaid 
enrollment as being included in the “other” factor but does not give adequate information to assess the 
impact.  
 
UH does not believe that CMS is providing sufficient transparency around the data sources or calculations 
used in the application of these “other” factors. In other words, not all the factors considered as “other” 
are known or understood by stakeholders to appropriately replicate CMS’ calculations. The lack of 
transparency in the calculations of Factor 1 is further underscored by the discrepancy in the Factor 1 
values CMS published in the proposed rule preamble and the DSH supplemental file, which stems from 
different “other” values that CMS uses in calculating estimated FY 2023 DSH payments, which it then 
 
15 However, we note that in recent years, when CMS has updated its Factor 1 and Factor 2 calculations, the UC pool 
has decreased from the proposed to final rule. 
Pg 8 
 
trends forward to 2026. This highlights the need for CMS to be transparent in its assumptions and 
calculations so that stakeholders can replicate CMS’ Medicare DSH projections.   
 
As mentioned in AAMC’s  FY 2022 IPPS comment letter, we continue to echo our concerns that the 
information being used in the “other” factor is not accurately accounting for the effects of the COVID-19 
PHE.16 Additionally, it is unclear how this “other” factor takes into account changes in Medicaid coverage 
resulting from Medicaid policy changes.  The AAMC strongly urges CMS to provide greater transparency 
on how OACT determines the “other” factor—including both the calculation and individual numbers 
included in the estimate—so that stakeholders can adequately understand and assess the appropriateness 
of the Factor 1 amount and the impact of external factors on the Factor 1 calculation in FY 2026. While 
CMS does provide some examples of the types of data that is included in the “other” factor such as 
Medicaid enrollment and various payment adjustments, not enough specific and meaningful information 
is provided to allow stakeholders to determine how these affect the factor. Since it is unclear how 
influential each of these are and it is unknown what other unnamed factors are considered, the AAMC 
cannot be confident in assessing the reasonability or appropriateness of the proposal.  
 
One potential way of addressing this issue would be to disaggregate the “other” factor into the main 
variables that affect its value. CMS could show the impact of each of these named factors and its weight 
in the “other” factor with a residual for all other items that have less of an impact on the final value. 
 
Account for Expected Higher Rates of Uninsured Individuals Due to Policy Changes Leading to 
Coverage Losses in the Calculation of Factor 2 
 
Factor 2 of the uncompensated care methodology determines the total available UC-based payment pool. 
This is determined annually by a percentage amount that represents the percent change in the rate of 
uninsured individuals in FY 2013 and the estimated percent of uninsured in the most recent year where 
data is available. OACT determines Factor 2 based on data from the National Health Expenditures 
Accounts (NHEA). CMS is proposing to continue to use the same methodology to calculate Factor 2 as 
the agency has in previous years. To calculate the uninsured rate in FY 2026, CMS uses a weighted 
average of the projected uninsured rates in calendar years 2025 and 2026.  
 
We do not feel that the current proposal for Factor 2 takes into account the magnitude of the dramatic 
increase in uninsured rates that will occur in FY 2026 due to various policy changes that will result in 
coverage losses. For example, the enhanced premium tax credits for enrollees in the Affordable Care Act 
health insurance marketplaces are set to expire under current law at the end of 2025, which in 2026 would 
result in loss of coverage for four million individuals.17 An additional 1.8 million individuals are expected 
to lose coverage due to changes that CMS proposed in its Marketplace Integrity and Affordability rule,18 
which was codified in the reconciliation bill that the House of Representatives passed on May 22.19 In 
previous years, CMS underestimated the impact of disenrollments, such as the effect of Medicaid 
redeterminations on the uninsured rate. With this in mind, we urge CMS to consider alternative data 
sources or calculations that more accurately account for the expected increase in the uninsured rate for FY 
2026. We are concerned that the current data from the NHEA that CMS is proposing to utilize for Factor 
 
16 AAMC, Comments to CMS on the FY 2022 IPPS Proposed Rule (June 2021). 
17 Congressional Budget Office Baseline Projections. The Premium Tax Credit and Related Spending. July 2024. 
https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2024-07/60523-2024-07-premium-tax-credit.pdf 
18 90 FR 12942 (March 19, 2025).  
19 One Big Beautiful Bill Act. H.R. 1. 119th Cong.  
Pg 9 
 
2 is not up to date. If CMS chooses to continue with its proposal of utilizing the NHEA data, which do not 
appear to be accurately accounting for coverage losses, then CMS must ensure that its estimates are 
accurate and up to date.  
 
LABOR RELATED SHARE UPDATES  
To calculate the payment that hospitals receive under the Medicare IPPS, a portion of the base payment is 
adjusted by a hospital’s wage index. The portion that is adjusted is known as the labor-related share. This 
share is equal to either the standardized share of 62 percent or CMS’ estimated national labor-related 
share, whichever results in a higher payment.20 Hospitals with a wage index less than 1.000 will receive a 
labor-related share of 62 percent, while those with a wage index of greater than 1.000 will receive CMS’ 
estimated national labor-related share. CMS updates the estimate of the national labor-related share every 
four years, and the estimate is due for an update in FY 2026. Currently in FY 2025, CMS’ estimate is 
based on the 2018-based IPPS market basket for discharges after October 1, 2021, resulting in an 
estimated national labor-related share of 67.6 percent. CMS is proposing to recalculate the estimated 
national labor-related share using the proposed 2023-based IPPS market basket cost category weights for 
discharges occurring after October 1, 2025. This would reduce the labor related share from 67.6 percent 
to 66 percent, reducing the portion of the IPPS base payment rate subject to the wage index. (P.18236). 
This would disproportionally negatively impact hospitals with a wage index greater than 1.000. 
 
Ensure Accuracy and Transparency in Payment Methodologies and Data Used to Calculate the Labor-
Related Share  
 
Included in the proposed rule are the cost category weights CMS utilizes for the labor-related share. Of 
these, all but the labor-related professional fees remained the same or were reduced from the 2018-based 
IPPS market basket cost weights to the new proposal based on 2023-based IPPS market basket data. 
(P.18246). However, in an analysis from KFF and Peterson Center that evaluated changes in hospital 
employment data, including wage data, from February 2020 at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic 
through early 2024, wages were found to have increased. These findings are puzzling when compared to 
what we observed in CMS’ proposed cost weights. This analysis found that the average weekly earnings 
for healthcare employees had gone up 20.8 percent from $1,038 to $1,254 weekly in January 2024. Even 
more specific to IPPS, the report found that hospital workers wages saw a 20.3% increase between 
February 2020 to January 2024, going from $1,269 to $1,527 per week.21 CMS also observed this shift in 
wages in the agency’s analysis of audited wage data for FY 2020 to 2021 in the FY 2025 IPPS proposed 
rule, which saw larger increases in average hourly wages and wage indexes than compared to years 
prior.22 Given these findings, we believe that CMS’ methodology may not be accurately or fully capturing  
hospital labor expenses reflected in these trends.  
 
To verify the validity of the agency’s proposed changes, the AAMC and other stakeholders often replicate 
CMS’ calculations and estimates to verify the accuracy of proposed changes impacting hospital payment. 
Through this exercise, we were not able to replicate the proposed 66.0 percent labor-related share as CMS 
has not issued enough information on the intermediate steps used to determine the rebasing to allow 
stakeholders to fully replicate the agency’s calculations with certainty and verify CMS’ estimate. We 
understand the need for rebasing the labor share but request that CMS release additional information on 
 
20 Section 1886(d)(3)(E) of the Social Security Act 
21 “What are the recent trends in health sector employment?” Peterson-KFF Health System Tracker, March 27, 2024.  
22 89 FR 36151 
Pg 10 
 
how it arrived at its proposed estimate for the national labor-related share for FY 2026. In our attempt to 
replicate this year’s proposed labor-related share in conjunction with Watson Policy Analysis, we 
calculated a higher labor related share than the 66.0 percent proposed by CMS. However, without 
additional information, it is impossible to tell if this calculation is a result of an error on our part, CMS’ 
part, or just a difference in methodology or rounding. To accurately replicate and verify the labor 
related share, we request CMS publish a table of their intermediate steps reflective of the 
numerators and denominators utilized in each cost category and calculation step. To that end, it 
would be helpful to also include the dollar values used to calculate the percentage of each cost category. 
Without this information and transparency, there are gaps in understanding that add challenges to 
interpreting how CMS calculates the proposed values used to establish the labor-related share. Lastly, this 
creates more challenges in providing valuable feedback without adequate understanding of how CMS has 
arrived at these proposed values for the labor-related share.  
 
MEDICARE WAGE INDEX - LOW WAGE INDEX POLICY 
In the fiscal year (FY) 2020 IPPS final rule, CMS first implemented the low wage index policy to address 
disparities between high and low wage index hospitals in the current wage index calculation.23 The 
finalized low wage index policy directly raised the wage index of the lowest quartile wage index hospitals 
by half the difference between the 25th percentile wage index value and the hospital’s individual wage 
index. The goal of this policy was to provide an opportunity for these low wage index hospitals to 
increase employee compensation, which would then be permanently reflected in future wage index data. 
However, while this policy raised the wage index values of the bottom quartile hospitals, it did so at the 
expense of all hospitals nationwide due to a budget neutrality adjustment. 
 
CMS implemented this policy for four years from FY 2020 until the end of FY 2023 to allow low wage 
index hospitals to raise wages, but due to the impact of the COVID-19 public health emergency, the 
agency extended this policy, once in FY 2024 and then again in the FY 2025 IPPS final rule for an 
additional three years. During this time, the low wage index policy and associated budget neutrality 
adjustment faced multiple legal challenges.24,25 Prior to the release of the FY 2025 IPPS final rule, the 
U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit ruled that CMS did not have the authority to implement the 
low wage index policy or the associated budget neutrality adjustment.26 Based on the court’s July 23, 
2024, decision in Bridgeport Hospital v. Becerra27, CMS reversed the continuation of the low wage index 
policy and associated budget neutrality adjustment for FY 2025 in the FY 2025 IPPS Interim Final Action 
(IFC).28 To continue CMS’  compliance with the courts orders, CMS is proposing in the FY 2026 IPPS 
proposed rule to discontinue the low wage index policy and the associated budget neutrality adjustment in 
FY 2026 and beyond. (P. 18233). UH appreciates CMS’ efforts to correct these wage index policies as 
ordered by the U.S. Court of Appeals.  
 
Ensure the Reversal of the Low Wage Index Policy Has Minimal Harm For All Hospitals 
In addition to removing the low wage index policy and associated budget neutrality, CMS is proposing a 
narrow transitional payment exception for low wage index hospitals significantly impacted by the 
 
23 84 FR 42044 
24Bridgeport Hosp. v. Becerra, 589 F. Supp. 3d 1 (D.D.C. 2022) 
25 Kaweah Delta Health Care Dist. v. Becerra, 1:21-cv-01422 AWI SKO (E.D. Cal. Sep. 22, 2021) 
26 Bridgeport Hosp. v. Becerra, No. 22-5249 (D.C. Cir. Jul. 23, 2024) 
27 Id. 
28 89 FR 80405 
Pg 11 
 
removal of the low wage index policy in FY 2026. This is similar to the transitional policy included in the 
FY 2025 IPPS IFC.29 CMS defines significantly impacted hospitals as those that have a proposed FY 
2026 wage index decreasing by more than 9.75 percent from their FY 2024 wage index. These impacted 
hospitals would receive 90.25 percent of their FY 2024 wage index for FY 2026. The policy allows 
impacted hospitals to receive a slightly higher wage index calculation than if only the cap on wage index 
reduction was included, which would result in hospitals receiving only 90 percent of their FY 2024 wage 
index. However, this policy would be budget neutral, which differs from the transitional policy included 
in the FY 2025 IPPS IFC. CMS cited the timing of the IFC as their reason why they did not originally 
include a budget neutrality adjustment, but the agency feels this proposed rule allows more notice for 
stakeholders to respond and comment, making it appropriate to include the budget neutral adjustment in 
this proposal. (p. 18234).  
 
UH appreciates CMS ensuring there is support for impacted low wage index hospitals by proposing a 
transitional policy. However, we remain concerned with the inclusion of an associated budget neutrality 
adjustment that harms higher wage index hospitals for policies to remedy negative impacts on low wage 
index hospitals. UH supports CMS’ underlying goal of addressing financial difficulties faced by low 
wage index hospitals, but we urge the agency to do so without hindering the payment or wage index of 
the non-eligible hospitals. Including a budget neutrality adjustment for this policy perpetuates the same 
issues that arose with the original low wage index policy, which improved the standing of low wage index 
hospitals at the expense of higher wage index hospitals. This very practice was found by the courts to 
have exceeded the agency’s authority and is the basis for why a transitional policy is now needed. 
Further, UH  does not believe that the agency having more time to issue notice and comment changes 
requirements for use of a budget neutrality adjustment is a valid reason for making this adjustment. If the 
agency was able to implement this policy in the FY 2025 IFC without inclusion of a budget neutrality 
adjustment, it should also be able to do so here. This is especially true given that the scope and magnitude 
of the proposed FY 2026 transitional policy is even more minimal than the FY 2025 IFC transitional 
policy. The impact to payment in FY 2026 is $10 million dollars less than FY 2025. (p. 18235). 
Therefore, we urge the agency to move forward with the transitional policy but ask the agency not 
to finalize the proposed budget neutrality adjustment associated with the transitional policy.  
 
Identify Factors and Policies to Support Low Wage Index Hospitals Without Impacting High Wage 
Index Hospitals Through Budget Neutrality  
 
UH supports CMS’ removal of the budget neutrality adjustment associated with the low wage index 
policy as we have historically been critical of implementing policies to support low wage index hospitals 
at the expense of higher wage hospitals. Despite this, we still support CMS’ goal to address the 
difficulties faced by low wage index hospitals resulting in wage disparities and urge the agency to 
consider alternative policies that improve the standing and ensure adequate reimbursement to low wage 
index hospitals without negatively impacting payment to other hospitals. We also emphasize our prior 
comments on the low wage index policy in the FY 2025 IPPS proposed rule and years prior to encourage 
CMS to further investigate the specific factors causing these wage disparities. This will allow the agency 
to evaluate how the wage index has been impacted following the original implementation of the low wage 
index policy, the disruptions from the COVID-19 public health emergency, and what other factors may be 
contributing to the disparities in wage index values. Gaining this understanding will make way for CMS 
to implement more effective and impactful wage index policies.  
 
29 89 FR 80405 
Pg 12 
 
 
Re-Align the Wage Index Calculations for Hospital Inpatient and Outpatient Settings  
 
Finally, in the calendar year (CY) 2025 Outpatient Prospective Payment System (OPPS) final rule, CMS 
departed from its historical practice of utilizing the same wage index calculations in the inpatient setting 
as the outpatient setting. For CY 2025 under OPPS, CMS continued to utilize the FY 2025 IPPS final rule 
(not the interim final rule) wage index values that were inclusive of the low wage-index policy and the 
associated budget neutrality adjustment. 30 UH shared our concerns with this misalignment in our response 
to the FY 2025 IPPS IFC, and we remain concerned that a continuation of this misalignment in 2026 will 
create confusion and uncertainty in hospitals’ expected payment. Continuing this misalignment would be 
a significant departure from the agency’s historical practice and could have significant impacts to 
payment polices in the future that create discrepancies between the two payment systems. Further, 
continuing to allow for the use of the low wage index policy and associated budget neutrality adjustment 
in the OPPS context calls CMS’ statutory authority into question given the decision in Bridgeport 
Hospital v. Becerra.31 Due to this, UH urges the agency to restore its historical precedent of aligning 
wage index values in IPPS and OPPS in FY and CY 2026. 
 
While CMS believes that the agency may still apply the low wage index policy and associated budget 
neutrality adjustment in the OPPS context32, UH  disagrees. Given the interconnectedness between IPPS 
and OPPS, we do not believe that just because the OPPS statute is slightly less prescriptive on how the 
agency can calculate the wage index values, that the agency can still apply a policy in OPPS that was 
found to exceed statutory authority under IPPS. This is especially true as CMS has aligned the wage 
index calculations for both settings since the establishment of the OPPS due to the inseparable, 
subordinate status of the Hospital Outpatient Department (HOPD) within the hospital overall, meaning 
there is no significant variability in the geographic makeup of the HOPD and the hospital overall that 
would require a separate wage index calculation for these two settings.   
 
CHIMERIC ANTIGEN RECEPTOR (CAR) T-CELL THERAPY 
Teaching health-systems and hospitals serve as key institutions for patients to receive innovative cutting-
edge treatment such as CAR T-cell therapy. These therapies are provided at designated treatment centers, 
which are almost exclusively within academic health systems as these are the institutions best positioned 
to provide cutting edge care and manage complications (often life threatening) that are encountered as the 
patient goes through this course of care. They remain committed to advancing treatment options through 
medical knowledge of new therapies and technologies to prevent and treat disease. CAR T-cell therapy is 
just one example of these cutting-edge therapies predominantly furnished at teaching health-systems and 
hospitals. New technologies often come with high price tags and CAR T-cell therapy is no exception as 
has been discussed extensively through rulemaking in recent years. Ensuring accurate and sufficient 
payment of these therapies is essential to guarantee patient access. Without proper reimbursement, 
providers may be unable to provide services and support to the patients who need it most as they pursue 
these treatment options. As we anticipate additional cutting-edge therapies entering the market, especially 
in the cell and gene therapy space, we look forward to working with CMS to guarantee reimbursement to 
hospitals is adequate and reflects the condition of the patient being treated. 
 
 
30 89 FR 93912 
31 Bridgeport Hosp. v. Becerra, No. 22-5249 (D.C. Cir. Jul. 23, 2024) 
32 89 FR 93975 
Pg 13 
 
Finalize Policies to Ensure CAR T-Cell Therapy Clinical Trial Cases are Correctly Identified 
 
We remain supportive of CMS’ policies to exclude CAR T-cell clinical trial cases from the calculation of 
the relative weight for MS-DRG 018.33 Removing the clinical trial cases allows CMS to evaluate the true 
costs of CAR T-cell cases given that many of the clinical trial CAR T-cell cases do not include the cost of 
the CAR T-cell therapy. Including these cases would skew the calculation of the relative weight for MS-
DRG 018 given the high cost of the therapy and would not accurately account for the cost to hospitals for 
these treatments if cases for which the hospital obtains the treatment at zero cost are included. Building on 
this policy, CMS is proposing for FY 2026 to continue its current methodology to exclude claims in MS-
DRG 018 with the presence of condition code “90” or ICD-10-CM diagnosis code Z00.6 without payer-
only code “ZC” that group to MS-DRG 018 as well as a new proposal. Condition code “90” is used to 
identify claims where a service was provided under expanded access approval, meaning that the service 
was provided to a patient under special FDA approval outside of a clinical trial. Meanwhile, ICD-10-CM 
diagnosis code Z00.6 describes an encounter in a clinical research program, while the condition code 
“ZC” indicates that the payment adjustment factor for clinical trials should not be applied to the case. The 
cases that use condition code “ZC” are typically those where the product was purchased in the usual 
manner, but the case involves the clinical trial of a different product. In the new proposal, CMS would 
also exclude claims with standardized drug charges below the median standardized drug charge of clinical 
trial cases in MS-DRG 018. The agency would apply this policy for two years until the claims data 
reflects the condition code for immunotherapy products not purchased in the usual manner, such as those 
purchased at no cost to the provider. (p. 18079). 
 
We agree with CMS’ proposal to exclude claims with standardized drug charges below the median 
standardized drug charge of clinical trial cases in MS-DRG 018. This proposal would include an 
additional layer of review to ensure there are no cases that are mislabeled. Over the years CMS has 
refined its methodology to identify clinical trials, and we have previously shared concerns that strictly 
identifying a clinical trial case by Z00.6 without also looking at the drug costs, could exclude cases that 
include the full cost of the CAR T-cell therapy.34 While CMS has made improvements in its 
methodologies to avoid this scenario, UH still believes the most accurate method would include 
evaluating standardized drug charges. As the agency continues to tweak and expand its guidance for 
coding, claims may be wrongly coded or misidentified by condition codes or ICD-10 codes for a clinical 
trial that reflects the use of a CAR T-cell therapy. Such an occurrence could result in underpayment by 
excluding a case despite it having the full cost for the product and underpaying hospitals across the board 
for the treatment. A clinical trial adjuster would also be applied to cases marked as clinical trials or 
expanded access, lowering payment for the specific case that is not truly a CAR-T clinical trial. Due to 
this, UH  urges CMS to finalize its proposal and consider further refining its methodology to 
consider both standardized drug charges and diagnostic codes to correctly identify CAR T-Cell 
Therapy clinical trial cases. This will ensure that CMS has the most accurate methodology so that 
hospitals are adequately reimbursed for clinical trials and full cost CAR T-cell therapy as well as clinical 
trial cases for other treatments, but also include CAR T-cell therapy. This is essential to guarantee patient 
access, which without proper reimbursement may be at risk.  
 
 
 
33 88 FR 58640 
34 AAMC, Comments to CMS on the FY 2021 IPPS Proposed Rule (July 2020) 
Pg 14 
 
HOSPITAL QUALITY PROGRAMS 
CROSS-CUTTING PROPOSALS AND REQUEST FOR INFORMATION  
Ensure Extensions Under Revised Extraordinary Circumstances Exception (ECE) Policy Do Not 
Become the Default Relief for Hospitals Requesting an ECE 
 
CMS proposes to update the Extraordinary Circumstances Exception (ECE) Policy for the Hospital 
Readmissions Reduction Program, Value-Based Purchased Program, Hospital-Acquired Condition 
Reduction Program, and Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting Program to consistently include reporting 
extensions as a form of relief CMS may grant hospitals in response to a hospital’s ECE request across the 
programs. (p. 18289, 18301, 18303, and 18344, respectively). UH supports the proposal to provide an 
intermediate form of relief for hospitals experiencing extraordinary circumstances that temporarily 
affect their ability to submit data. We ask that CMS commit to providing transparency when it grants 
both forms of relief (and in which circumstances) to ensure that reporting extensions are not 
disproportionately utilized as the default relief even where a full exception to reporting may be more 
appropriate relief.  
 
RFI: Transition to Digital Quality Measures (dQMs) 
 
UH supports a long-term goal of implementing a digital and interoperable quality measurement 
enterprise. Such an enterprise has great promise to improve patient outcomes and experience while also 
lessening quality measurement burdens for both health systems and the federal government. We also 
support the use of Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR), as this standard is internationally 
supported and easier to implement and more fluid than many other available frameworks. However, prior 
to adopting FHIR-based dQMs, we recommend CMS prioritize the adoption of data modernization 
guidance to ensure public and private infrastructure are well-equipped to support this shift in 
interoperable data reporting pathways necessary for successful FHIR-based reporting. 
 
Each Measure Under Consideration for Transition to FHIR-based Measurement Should be 
Evaluated for Potential Benefits and Security Risks and Costs Prior to Proposing the Transition 
for Use in CMS Programs 
 
UH supports CMS dQM initiative’s initiative to adopt self-contained measure specifications and code 
packages that can be transmitted electronically via interoperable systems. Though dQMs may be helpful 
for some quality measures to better assess public health and outcomes data, transitioning to dQMs for all 
measures may not warrant the risk and burden. Given that dQMs require additional considerations for 
compliance due to the specificity of information, we request the creation of regulatory frameworks to 
protect patient safety and privacy. In choosing which quality measures to move to dQM, CMS should 
formally evaluate the potential difference in performance and benefit that could be achieved and 
weigh it against the security risk and cost. If the impact of conversion to DQM does not outweigh 
the burden for a given quality measure, we believe that conversion to FHIR-eCQMs may be 
sufficient.  
 
Publicly Share Information on Progress to Re-specify eCQMs to FHIR-based Measurement, 
Including Testing and Feasibility 
 
Pg 15 
 
CMS discusses efforts it is taking to convert current eCQMs to FHIR-based eCQMs using Quality 
Improvement-Core (QI-Core) Implementation Guides. This includes efforts undertaken through HL7 
Connectathons and integrated systems testing. UH asks CMS to publicly share more on this effort, 
including information on real-world testing and feasibility of the FHIR-based eCQMs. We are concerned 
that only the most sophisticated health systems can engage with FHIR testing activities and may not be 
able to provide a comprehensive or representative sample of issues hospitals might face with 
implementing FHIR-based measurement. During the conversion from QRDA to FHIR, we underscore the 
importance of data validation to mitigate data gaps and inconsistencies, given that the outputs using 
QRDA and FHIR can differ even when using the same quality measure definition. Additionally, FHIR-
based specifications for eCQMs should go through the measure endorsement process by a Consensus-
Based Entity prior to their proposed adoption in CMS programs to ensure the measures, as re-specified, 
are valid, reliable, and feasible to report.  
 
Ensure a Sufficient Timeline, Greater than 24 Months, for Hospitals to Transition to FHIR-based 
eCQM Reporting 
 
Specific to timing, CMS asks whether a minimum of 24 months from the effective adoption of FHIR-
based eCQM reporting option through ONC Health IT Certification Program criteria is sufficient time for 
hospital implementation. Similarly, CMS asks if a two-year reporting options window is sufficient prior 
to mandating eCQMs be reported using FHIR-based methods. (p. 18326) UH believes a longer timeframe 
will be necessary to support successful transition to FHIR-based eCQM reporting. Changes to ONC 
Health IT Certification Program criteria often take time to realize on the ground within the EHR and 
challenges with implementation are only compounded when these changes are needed to meet reporting 
requirements tied to Medicare funding. For example, CMS initially revised the specifications for the 
hospital-wide measures in the IQR to become hybrid EHR-based measures, without any direct tie to a 
CEHRT criteria change, with a two-year voluntary reporting period before transitioning to mandatory 
status. That voluntary reporting period had to be extended due to the challenges faced by those hospitals 
able to invest in voluntary reporting, and in this rule, CMS proposes further reducing thresholds for 
reporting EHR-based data to ensure hospitals will be able to successfully report. (p. 18343) Based on this 
experience, we urge CMS to consider implementation and reporting requirement transitions greater than 
24 months to ensure all hospitals have sufficient time to successfully report FHIR-based measurement. 
We also advocate for flexibility in allowing health systems to choose whether or not to use the FHIR 
server for data extraction and calculations during this transition period. 
 
HOSPITAL READMISSIONS REDUCTION PROGRAM (HRRP) 
 
Do Not Add Medicare Advantage (MA) Patients and Payment Data to HRRP Measures 
 
CMS proposes to modify all measures in the HRRP to integrate MA patients into each measure and 
reduce the applicable performance period by one year to a two-year period. (p. 18283) CMS states that 
integrating MA patients into the measure would ensure that the readmissions measures capture the 
outcomes across all Medicare patients, and that with the observed and projected growth of the MA-
covered population, failure to include MA patients in the measures would exclude a large segment of the 
Medicare population for quality measurement. (p. 18284) UH recognizes the growth of MA and agrees 
that it is critical to ensure quality of care across the entire Medicare population. However, where quality 
measurement is tied to payment penalties in fee-for-service (FFS) Medicare, we strongly believe that 
measurement must directly tie to quality outcomes for similarly situated FFS patients and for performance 
Pg 16 
 
within the hospital’s control. UH strongly urges CMS not to finalize this policy in recognition that the 
addition of MA patients will unfairly penalize hospitals for MA plan behavior rather than hospital 
quality performance and introduce bias into HRRP. 
 
MA Benefit Design Limiting Access to Appropriate Post-Acute Care is Incongruous with Fair 
Measurement of Hospital Performance in the HRRP 
 
Patients who receive their Medicare benefit through a MA plan accept different benefit design than that of 
patients who choose traditional FFS Medicare, including provider network restrictions, referral 
requirements, and prior authorization of services like post-acute care. A Congressional investigation has 
highlighted how MA plans deny MA patients access to medically necessary post-acute care.35, 36 This is 
significant when measuring readmissions, as readmissions are influenced largely by access to appropriate 
post-discharge care.37 Thus, by including MA patients in performance measurement, hospitals are likely 
to be held accountable for MA plan behavior that restricts access to care that is not present when 
measuring only FFS patients.  
 
Use of Hospital Shadow Claims Data to Determine Aggregate Excess Readmissions Payments is 
Biased Against Teaching Hospitals and Safety Net Hospitals 
 
In addition to including MA patients in performance measurement, CMS proposes to use payment data 
for MA patients to calculate the aggregate payments for excess readmissions, by using MedPAR data 
from hospital submitted information-only claims for inpatient stays for MA patients. (p. 18287) As noted 
in analysis prepared for CMS, information-only claims from hospitals are the only source of MA payment 
information and hospitals that receive medical education and disproportionate-share hospital payments 
are required to submit information-only claims for MA patients with inpatient stays in order to calculate 
those payments.38 Not all hospitals receive those add-on payments, so not all hospitals report complete 
MA payment information to CMS on the information-only claims they submit, thus CMS will introduce 
bias in the calculation of aggregate payments for excess readmissions against teaching and safety net 
hospitals that are required to submit such information. UH strongly believes that payment penalty 
calculations in the FFS-penalty HRRP must be based upon payment data that is fair and 
consistently reported and available across all hospitals in the program.  
 
 
VALUE-BASED PURCHASING (VBP) PROGRAM 
 
Adopting Measure Modifications to the THA/TKA Complications Measure 
 
CMS proposes to modify the Hospital-Level Risk-Standardized Complication Rate (RSCR) Following 
Elective Primary Total Hip Arthroplasty (THA) and/or Total Knee Arthroplasty (TKA) to include MA 
patients and reduce the performance period by one year to two years beginning with FY 2033 program 
 
35 U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Refusal of Recovery: How Medicare Advantage Insurers 
Have Denied Patients Access to Post-Acute Care (October 17, 2024).  
36 E. Cahan, Medicare Advantage Has Become Notorious for Prior Authorization – CMS and Lawmakers Are 
Taking Action, JAMA (August 30, 2024). 
37 JS Dhaliwal and AK Dang, Reducing Hospital Readmissions, StatPearls (June 7, 2024).  
38 Yale New Have Health Services Corporation – Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, 2024 Condition- 
and Procedure-Specific Readmission Measures Supplemental Methodology Report (March 2024).  
Pg 17 
 
year, after a period of use of the modified measure in the Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting (IQR) 
Program. (p. 18290) UH asks CMS to release data on the modified measure with the inclusion of MA 
patients to enable assessment of whether the expanded population improves measure reliability 
without skewing performance based on MA benefit design outside of hospital control. We agree that 
measuring across all Medicare patients facially could improve reliability, as the measure focuses on the 
lower volume of higher-risk patients having elective THA and TKA procedures in the inpatient setting. 
However, without data to assess, we remain concerned that MA benefit design, notably the use of prior 
authorization of services, could influence post-discharge complications in a manner that is incongruous 
with measuring only FFS patients. Additionally, we ask CMS to confirm that there is no intention to use 
hospital-submitted MA payment information to influence payment bonuses or penalties under the VBP, 
unlike the addition of MA patients for the readmission measures. Finally, we support providing 
hospitals with time to understand measure performance with the modified patient population 
during the transition period for the measure in the IQR, and if performance is skewed by the 
inclusion of MA patients due to MA benefit design, CMS should limit the expanded measure 
population to the pay-for-reporting IQR Program. 
 
INPATIENT QUALITY REPORTING (IQR) PROGRAM 
 
Measure Removals 
 
 
Finalize Removal of Four Measures from the IQR with CY 2024 Reporting 
 
CMS proposes to remove four measures on the basis that benefits of the measures is outweighed by the 
burdens of measurement: (1) Hospital Commitment to Health Equity structural measure, (2) COVID-19 
Vaccination Coverage Among Healthcare Personnel measure, (3) Screening for Social Drivers of Health 
(SDOH) measure, and (4) Screen Positive Rate for SDOH. All removals are proposed effective with CY 
2024 reporting. (pp. 18336-7) UH supports these measure removals to reduce burden for providers.  
 
Reduce Burden by Replacing the Sepsis Bundle Measure with a Measure of Sepsis Outcomes 
 
Currently, the sepsis bundle measure (SEP-1) is required by hospitals in the IQR since 2015 reporting and 
the VBP beginning with 2024 reporting.39, 40 Hospitals have spent considerable effort — and achieved 
significant results — in mitigating the incidence and severity of sepsis, saving lives in the process. 
Unfortunately, research has demonstrated that the sepsis bundle measure has not led to better outcomes 
yet entails an enormous administrative burden as a chart-abstracted measure.41 UH encourages CMS to 
work with clinical leaders to develop and adopt a valid, reliable, feasible outcomes measure to 
inform and improve effective and timely sepsis care. 
 
IQR Reporting Requirements 
 
Modify Hybrid EHR Measure EHR-Derived Data Thresholds for Reporting and Consider Further  
 
39 79 FR 50241 (August 22, 2014) 
40 88 FR 59081 (August 28, 2023) 
41 C. Rhee, et al, Complex Sepsis Presentations, SEP-1 Bundle Compliance, and Outcomes, JAMA Network Open 
(March 19, 2025), finding that complex clinical presentations were more common among patients whose treatment 
was noncompliant with SEP-1, which may confound the association between SEP-1 compliance and mortality. 
Pg 18 
 
Delay of Mandatory Reporting Period Based on Analysis of the July 2024 – June 2025 Voluntary 
Reporting Period 
 
CMS proposes to decrease the submission thresholds for hospitals reporting hybrid measure core clinical 
data elements (CCDEs) and linking variables beginning with the July 2025 – June 2026 mandatory 
reporting period impacting FY 2028 payment determinations. Specifically, CMS proposes to reduce 
thresholds to 70 percent of discharges, instead of the current 90 and 95 percent thresholds for CCDEs and 
linking variables, respectively. Additionally, CMS proposes to allow hospitals up to two missing lab 
values and up to two missing vital signs when reporting CCDEs. (p. 18343) UH appreciates the 
agency’s attention to the challenges hospitals have faced in voluntarily reporting data derived from 
EHRs. We support these policies to ease burden on hospitals while maintaining statistical validity 
and progressing the transition to incorporating more granular clinical data into quality 
measurement. We urge CMS to consider extending voluntary reporting for an additional period, 
based on analysis of the final voluntary reporting period that ends June 2025, should it find that a 
significant portion of hospitals voluntarily reporting continue to struggle with CCDEs and linking 
variables. We remain concerned that hospitals with the least resources have not been able to invest in 
voluntary reporting may not be able to meet these reduced thresholds for the July 2025 to June 2026 
mandatory reporting period and will lose 25 percent of the annual payment update in FY 2028. Any relief 
on mandatory reporting would come after these hospitals will have needed to commit to reporting, 
allowing CMS to ensure that it maintains momentum towards reporting by all hospitals in the IQR for the 
reporting period. 
 
Measure Concepts Under Consideration for Future Years in the IQR—RFI: Well-Being and Nutrition 
 
 
New IQR Measures Should be Valid, Reliable, and Meaningfully Connected to Inpatient Care 
 
UH supports the agency in its efforts to improve well-being and nutrition in part through its quality 
measurement programs. In general, we believe that new quality metrics should be endorsed by a 
Consensus-Based Entity as valid and reliable for the measured entity (i.e., valid and reliable for analysis 
of performance of acute care hospitals for the inpatient setting when considered for use in the IQR). In the 
case of new measures for well-being and nutrition in the IQR, we believe that the metrics must be 
meaningfully connected to the delivery of high-quality inpatient acute hospital care. Some measure 
concepts, while critically important to improving population health, may not be valid and reliable for the 
inpatient care setting, and instead be better used in health plan or public health department quality 
measurement and improvement.42 
 
Consider Measures that Encourage Providers to Gain Insights on Factors that Influence 
Individual Well-Being Outside of Health Care 
 
Much of what influences an individual’s overall health and well-being is outside the health care delivery 
system. Nonmedical drivers of health, such as safe environments, access to nutritious food and physical 
activity, greatly impact well-being. We recommend CMS consider measures for health care providers to 
 
42 For example, “Dehydration Admission Rate (PQI 10)” is a well-being measure for a population, assessing data 
from claims in the acute care facility that analyzes performance at the city/county/national population-level and 
“Well-Child Visits in the First 15 Months of Life” is a well-being measure of care delivered in the ambulatory care 
setting that analyzes health plans and integrated delivery systems. 
Pg 19 
 
drive improvements in well-being that encourage providers to gain greater insights into the nonmedical 
factors that are influencing their patients’ and community’s health.  
 
PROMOTING INTEROPERABILITY (PI) PROGRAM 
 
CMS Should Reconsider Inclusion of the Security Risk Analysis Measure in the PI Program as 
Duplicative with HIPAA Security Rule Compliance 
 
CMS proposes to modify the Security Risk Analysis measure currently included in the PI Program. (p. 
18357) UH  strongly supports policies that promote cybersecurity best practices, but we question whether 
this measure does so, given that it is based directly on the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA) requirements implemented in the HIPAA Security Rule already imposed on 
hospitals. We urge CMS to reconsider the continued inclusion of this measure in the program as an 
opportunity to reduce burden of reporting and refocus PI Program measurement to drive improved 
interoperability and data sharing.  
 
RFI Regarding the Query of Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) Measure 
 
Changing the Query of PDMP Measure from an Attestation-Based Measure to a Performance-
Based Measure in the Future in Line with ONC Adoption of Certification Criterion to Better 
Support PDMP Interoperability  
 
CMS is seeking information on whether to change the Query of PDMP measure to a performance-based 
measure to further promote the utilization of PDMPs and support appropriate prescribing practices. (p. 
18373) UH  supports improved interoperability measure concepts to improve patient care and ensure 
legitimate prescribing of controlled substances. One barrier to a performance-based Query of PDMP 
measure is ensuring all CEHRT products adopt and use the “PDMP Databases – Query, receive, validate, 
parse, and filter” certification criterion proposed (but not yet finalized) by ONC.43 If finalized by ONC as 
a certification criterion, we believe it will greatly improve hospitals’ ability to report a performance-based 
PDMP query measure, though we must note that it would likely be several years before all certified EHRs 
would be ready to deploy the criterion and then require a period of transition for hospitals to adapt to 
performance-based measure. Additionally, there is ongoing work to establish a national PDMP to more 
effectively support data collection and analysis towards the Drug Enforcement Administration’s anti-
diversion efforts for controlled substances. CMS should consider the government’s timeframe for 
implementing a national PDMP,44 and align it with the implementation timeframe to change the Query of 
PDMP measure to a performance-based measure.  
 
Evaluate Future Modification of the Query of PDMP Measure to Include All Schedule II Drugs in 
Line with State PDMP Capabilities and Broader Policy Goals of Adopting a Nationwide PDMP 
 
CMS is seeking information on whether to revise the measure to include all Schedule II Drugs, rather than 
only focusing on Schedule II opioids. (p. 18374) UH supports further investigation of an expanded PDMP 
 
43 ASTP/ONC, Health Data, Technology, and Interoperability: Patient Engagement, Information Sharing, and Public 
Health Interoperability (HTI-2 Proposed Rule), 89 FR 63498, at 63547 (August 5, 2024). 
44 Drug Enforcement Administration, Special Registrations for Telemedicine and Limited State Telemedicine 
Registrations, 90 FR 6541, at 6543 (January 17, 2025), describing a proposed nationwide PDMP check that would 
be delayed in effective for three years, based on development of such a nationwide PDMP capability. 
Pg 20 
 
measure. As CMS notes, most states (but not all) collect data on Schedules II, III, and IV drugs that are 
prescribed. (p. 18374) Hospitals in states that do not collect expanded data across all drug Schedules will 
likely need more time to develop capacity and readiness for expanded PDMP checks once supported in 
their state. CMS should ensure all states are able to collect data on all Schedule II drugs before expanding 
the measure in the PI Program. As previously noted, there is ongoing work to establish a national PDMP. 
45 CMS should consider the government’s timeframe for implementing a national PDMP, and whether 
that timeframe might be best aligned with a modification of the Query of PDMP measure to include all 
Schedule II drugs. That extra time to implement could align with the time necessary to evaluate the 
potential unintended consequences of measure expansion, including creating barriers for patients 
appropriately prescribed Schedule II non-opioid drugs, such as central nervous stimulants to treat ADHD.  
 
RFI: Performance-Based Measures 
 
Leverage Standards for Health IT Modules to Better Support Public Health Data Exchange and 
Improve Investments in Public Health Agency Capabilities Prior to Transitioning Hospitals to 
Performance-Based Measures in the Public Health and Clinical Data Exchange Objective of the 
PI Program 
 
UH strongly supports efforts to modernize public health through advancing data science 
capabilities. Improving public health interoperability is key not only for the health of individual patients 
but also for the wellbeing of entire communities. The ability to exchange public health data efficiently 
between hospitals, health systems, and state/local public health entities is vital for addressing large-scale 
health challenges, such as pandemics, vaccination programs, and tracking public health trends. Improved 
public health data and data sharing directly influences the collective health and safety of communities and 
the nation. We urge CMS and ASTP/ONC to continue to collaborate with the Centers for Disease 
Prevention and Control (CDC) on efforts to improve public health interoperability, including 
efforts to understand limitations with underfunded state and local public health departments and 
their underlying public health technology infrastructure to ensure that our public health agencies 
have the capabilities needed to work with providers to improve public health interoperability 
through updated health IT module certification requirements. These standards and public health 
agency capabilities are critically important steps that must be successfully taken prior to holding hospitals 
accountable for performance-based measures on exchanging clinical data with public health agencies as 
part of the PI Program.  
 
Rather than transition all measures in the Public Health and Clinical Data Exchange Objective to 
performance-based measures, we recommend that CMS focus on one or two measures as test cases, 
potentially the antimicrobial use and resistance (AUR) Surveillance Reporting measure.  Current 
infectious disease public health reporting measures for AUR are largely focused on surveillance, tracking 
the rates of prioritized infections, antimicrobial use, and antimicrobial resistance in hospitals. While this 
information is relevant, these measures often do not drive meaningful change in the quality-of-care that 
patients with infections receive. We suggest the development of a new performance-based quality 
measure that catalyzes improvement in antimicrobial stewardship efforts. 
 
The data modernization efforts at the CDC, including the Data Modernization Initiative (DMI) and Public 
Health Data Strategy (PDHS), are critical to reducing AMR. While the PDHS lays out important strategic 
 
45 Id. 
Pg 21 
 
steps, DMI serves as the vehicle for innovation and improvement in data collection. Since 2019, some 
progress has been made to accelerate modernization through federal policies, data standards, and system 
interoperability. CDC modernization efforts must continue to be prioritized in tandem with quality 
measure restructuring to lower administrative and hospital burden. These efforts will allow for the 
development of report cards for hospitals to benchmark progress against national averages, driving 
improved care. 
 
RFI: Data Quality  
 
Commit Resources to Addressing Semantic Differences Across Health Systems to Improve Data 
Quality and Interoperability 
 
ASTP/ONC has worked diligently in the last several years to improve interoperability through the 
implementation of (and updates to) the United States Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI) standards. 
UH supports policies to improve the widespread adoption of updates to the USCDI, and we 
recommend that CMS and the ASTP/ONC commit resources to addressing semantic differences 
across health systems when implementing data standards under the updates to the USCDI. Data 
standardization is critical for interoperability, and we believe that the USCDI is a key to such 
standardization 
 
TRANSFORMING EPISODE ACCOUNTABILITY MODEL (TEAM) 
PRICING METHODOLOGY 
Apply a Beneficiary Economic Risk Adjustment Factor Based on the Community Deprivation Index 
(CDI) Using State-Level CDI Rankings and Dual-Eligibility Status 
 
CMS proposes to replace the use of the Area Deprivation Index (ADI) with the Community Deprivation 
Index (CDI) for purposes of constructing a beneficiary-level economic risk adjustment factor, where the 
CDI score would be ranked relative to the nation, and would trigger the binary yes/no factor where CDI 
meets an 80th percentile threshold. (p. 18393) UH supports replacing the ADI with the CDI; we have 
concerns that the ADI overweighted home values and thus was unable to meaningfully measure 
deprivation in some high cost of living urban areas. CMS also requests feedback on whether to 
continue to include dual eligibility status as a variable for the economic risk adjustment factor. (p. 18393) 
UH continues to support the inclusion of dual eligibility status for the TEAM economic risk 
adjustment factor methodology. While dual eligibility is an imperfect proxy of economic need and 
vulnerability, it remains an accessible, consistent data element that CMS can use and that hospitals 
understand.  
 
Increase the Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCCs) Lookback Period for Risk Adjustment to a 
Full Year 
 
CMS proposes to increase the lookback period to capture beneficiary-level HCCs for risk adjustment to 
180 days, double the 90 days finalized in the FY 2025 IPPS final rule. (p. 18394) UH appreciates the 
proposal to recognize the need for a longer period to sufficiently capture beneficiary acuity and better 
reflect the level of spending outside of the hospital’s control. We recommend CMS increase the 
lookback period to a full year, matching the policy of the prior mandatory episode payment model, 
Pg 22 
 
Comprehensive Joint Replacement (CJR).46 A one year lookback period would allow CMS to more 
accurately capture HCCs for a TEAM patient, as Medicare patients are encouraged to see their primary 
care physicians on an annual basis.47  
 
Ensure Adequate Risk Adjustment for Pricing Non-Elective Major Bowel Procedures 
 
In analysis of the DRGs included for major bowel procedures, DataGen, Inc. has found a significant 
difference in the average episode costs of elective vs non-elective procedures, with non-elective 
procedures more costly (by 14.0% for MS-DRG 329, 20.9% for MS-DRG 330, and 7.7% for MS-DRG 
331), likely due to higher risks for complications, infections, and readmissions.48  
The visualization below represents the average Medicare episode spend (in standard/normalized dollars) 
for Major Bowel Procedure episodes with an anchor admission discharge date during Calendar Year 
2023. The average Medicare episode spend is stratified by the trigger code of the inpatient admission and 
elective/non-elective status. Elective/non-elective status was defined using the admit type code on the 
anchor admission claim. The stacked vertical bars indicate the average Medicare episode spend by the 
types of claims/services utilized during the episode period. 
©2025 DataGen®, Inc. 
 
Failure to adequately stratify non-elective episode spending presents the potential for targets that are 
artificially low for teaching hospitals who care for patients with the most complex conditions and for 
trauma cases. UH urges CMS to ensure that there is appropriate risk adjustment to capture the 
spending differences by elective status to ensure that pricing targets are more equitable for 
hospitals more likely to provide non-elective major bowel procedures.  
 
 
 
 
46 42 CFR §510(a)(2) 
47 42 CFR §410.15, describing Medicare coverage of annual wellness visits. 
48 DataGen, Inc. simulated Transforming Episode Accountability Model episodes of care according to the 
specifications detailed in the FY 2025 IPPS Final Rule using the national Medicare Standard Analytic File Limited 
Data Sets. The source data contains 100% of the claims for institutional settings of care (inpatient hospital, 
outpatient hospital, skilled nursing, home health, and hospice) and non-institutional claims (carrier and durable 
medical equipment) for a 5% statistical sample of Medicare FFS beneficiaries. Carrier and durable medical 
equipment expenditures for beneficiaries not included in the 5% statistical sample are extrapolated by episode 
parameters (i.e., anchor episode MS-DRG or HCPCS code, first setting of post-acute care, beneficiary age group, 
beneficiary dual eligibility status, region, and claim setting).   
Pg 23 
 
Establish a Low Volume Threshold by Episode Category with No Downside Financial Risk 
CMS requests feedback on potential policies to address concerns about low volume providers 
participating in TEAM. CMS notes that for BPCI Advanced, a hospital must meet a low volume threshold 
of at least 31 episodes in a given baseline period for a given episode category and that hospitals are not 
held accountable for performance year spending if the low volume threshold is not met. (p. 18397) UH 
recommends CMS continue the BPCI Advanced low volume threshold policy and create a low-
volume threshold in TEAM of a minimum of 31 episodes in the three-year baseline for each clinical 
episode category. Where the low-volume threshold is not met, we recommend that CMS remove 
downside financial risk for that clinical episode category to hold the hospital harmless for spending over 
the reconciliation target price. In these instances, exceeding the target may be a product of pricing 
volatility due to limited episodes and the inability to spread financial risk across enough episodes. 
Additionally, UH recommends that CMS maintain data sharing with the hospital for that performance 
period so that the hospital may continue to invest in care transformation redesign and data analysis 
capabilities in advance of future performance periods where the hospital may exceed the low volume 
threshold for that episode category. 
 
QUALITY MEASUREMENT 
 
Implement a Consistent, Well-Tested Set of Quality Metrics for the Duration of the Model  
UH strongly recommends against using untested quality metrics in mandatory models. We also 
recommend keeping a consistent set of quality metrics for supporting continuity and evaluating the 
model.  
 
 
Alignment of the Hybrid Hospital-Wide Readmissions Measure to the IQR 
 
CMS previously adopted the Hybrid Hospital-Wide Readmissions (HWR) Measure in the Hospital 
Inpatient Quality Reporting (IQR) Program and now proposes to recognize changes to the measure in the 
IQR and align the measure changes for use in TEAM. Specifically, CMS proposes to use the July 1, 2025 
– June 30, 2026 first mandatory reporting period under the IQR as the baseline performance period for 
TEAM for PY 1 (2026) and otherwise include the revised submission requirements proposed under the 
IQR. (p. 18383).  
 
UH  has several concerns with using the first mandatory reporting period for TEAM. First, using the first 
mandatory reporting period means that TEAM participant hospitals will not have any insight into national 
measure performance until January 2027, due to the measure reporting timeframe49 and public reporting 
policies of the IQR.50 Second, using the first mandatory reporting period as the baseline for model 
performance comparisons means part of the PY 1 performance period is also part of the baseline. With 
this overlap, it is unclear how hospital performance will reasonably influence TEAM Composite Quality 
Scores (CQS). Third, CMS does not discuss in this proposal how it will measure performance on a 
 
49 CMS, CY 2025 Outpatient Prospective Payment System Final Rule, 89 FR 93912, at 94496 (November 27, 2024), 
reiterating Oct 1 as the deadline for reporting data to CMS following a July-June reporting period. 
50 CMS, FY 2012 Inpatient Prospective Payment System Final Rule, 72 FR 51476, at 51608 (August 18, 2011), 
noting that the IQR public reporting policy is to report measure performance publicly following a 30-day preview 
period for hospitals. In the case of the Hybrid HWR, with reporting due October 1 following the July - June 
reporting period, the earliest possible public reporting period for the July 2025 – June 2026 performance period 
would by the January 2027 refresh to Care Compare, which generally would be available to hospitals the fourth 
Wednesday of January.  
Pg 24 
 
calendar year performance period relative to a measure that spans multiple performance years as a July – 
June measure. And finally, UH remains concerned that hospitals may struggle to sufficiently report data 
derived from the EHR for this measure and may need more time with voluntary reporting status until a 
majority of hospitals demonstrate measure reporting capabilities.51 Holding TEAM participant 
hospitals to performance-based scoring on a measure that a majority of hospitals have yet to 
successfully report places undue burden on TEAM participants and CMS should reconsider use of 
the Hybrid HWR measure in TEAM. As an alternative, CMS could use the claims-based elements of 
the measure for performance measurement, as hospitals have long had access to publicly reported 
performance on the claims-only version of the Hybrid HWR measure.  
 
Adopting the Information Transfer Patient Reported Outcomes-Performance Measure (PRO-PM) 
from the OQR Beginning with PY 3 (2028) 
 
CMS proposes adopting the Information Transfer PRO-PM for PY 3 (2028) of the model, following the 
adoption of the measure in the Hospital Outpatient Quality Reporting (OQR) Program. (p. 18384) UH 
supports the use of patient-reported measures, where the measures are appropriately tested and understood 
by hospitals prior to use in this mandatory model. That is not the case with the Information Transfer PRO-
PM, which is new to the OQR with mandatory reporting beginning with CY 2027 reporting, 52 and for 
which hospitals will not have any insight on national performance trends until measure performance is 
publicly reported at the earliest in late July 2028.53 If the measure is adopted in TEAM for PY 3 it will 
create a scenario where the majority of hospitals not participating in the model will report the measure 
under the pay-for-reporting structure of the OQR and the minority of hospitals participating in TEAM 
will have their Medicare payment influenced by performance on the measure as part of the TEAM 
Composite Quality Score at best more than halfway through the 2028 performance period. This is 
problematic as the payment to hospitals participating in TEAM will be impacted without these hospitals 
having any ability to understand their performance relative to other hospitals across the nation. To remedy 
this information void, CMS could modify the proposal to adopt the measure beginning with PY 4 (2029), 
though UH is concerned that adding a measure for the last two years of the model would result in 
inconsistent metrics across the model test and could impact overall model evaluation for impact on 
quality of care. Given the inequitable measure use for PY 3 and challenges with later year model 
changes impact on model evaluation, UH strongly encourages CMS not to add the Information 
Transfer PRO-PM measure to TEAM.  
 
REFERRAL TO PRIMARY CARE SERVICES 
 
Amend Primary Care Referral Requirement to Apply Only Where TEAM Patients Affirm That They 
Do Not Have a Primary Care Practitioner 
 
 
51 Please refer to page 18 of these comments in response to the proposed modifications to the measure proposed in 
this year’s rule for the IQR. 
52 Supra, note 54 [CY25 OPPS] at 94406 and 94420 (November 27, 2024), finalizing adoption of the measure and 
establishing a Jan 1 – May 15 reporting period following the CY measure performance period. 
53 CMS, CY 2017 Outpatient Prospective Payment System Final Rule, 81 FR 79562, at 79791 (November 14, 2016), 
establishing a policy of public display as soon as possible after measure data have been submitted, with a 30-day 
hospital preview period. In the case of the Information Transfer PRO-PM, with reporting due May 15 following the 
CY reporting period, the earliest possible public reporting period for the CY 2027 performance period would by the 
July 2028 refresh to Care Compare, which generally would be available to hospitals the fourth Wednesday of July.  
Pg 25 
 
CMS seeks feedback on potential modifications to the existing requirement that TEAM participants refer 
TEAM patients to primary care services prior to discharge from the inpatient stay or hospital outpatient 
department. Specifically, CMS describes three alternatives to the existing policy: (1) requiring TEAM 
participants to identify the patient’s established relationship for primary care services through a 2-year 
claims lookback period to refer patients to their existing practitioners; (2) limiting the requirement only to 
patients without an established practitioner based upon a 2-year claims lookback for prior primary care 
services; and (3) requiring documentation of a patient’s preference where the TEAM participant refers the 
patient to a practitioner other than the patient’s existing primary care clinician. CMS notes that each 
option would increase the burden on TEAM participants to identify information through claims data and 
increased documentation. (p. 18402-3)  
 
UH agrees that there is value in maintaining a modified requirement in TEAM for referrals to primary 
care. To reduce the burden on TEAM participants, we recommend CMS amend the policy to 
require a primary care services referral for any TEAM patient who affirms to the TEAM 
participant that they do not have an existing relationship with a primary care practitioner.  
This modification to the requirement would be less burdensome. Allowing TEAM participants to make 
referrals directly in response to the patient’s preference to share information about their primary care 
practitioner (or lack thereof) would ease the burden and make this requirement more feasible to 
implement. TEAM participants do not generally have access to two years of claims data for all patients at 
the time of the anchor hospitalization or procedure to evaluate for existing primary care relationships. 
Only TEAM participants who participate in accountable care organizations (ACOs) are likely to have any 
historical claims information on ACO-aligned patients to be able to do any sort of claims analysis on 
established primary care relationships, and due to ACO-alignment, are likely aware of the patient’s 
existing relationship with an ACO primary care practitioner. Were CMS to consider providing past claims 
information to TEAM participants for all patients who are eligible to trigger TEAM episodes, we are 
concerned that only those hospitals with ACO or other population-based alternative payment models 
would have existing analytics capabilities to rely on to meet a claims-based primary care referral 
requirement.  
 
It is already a best practice for hospitals to incorporate follow-up appointments into their post-discharge 
procedures, including appointments with a patient’s primary care practitioner where appropriate.54 This is 
especially true for academic health systems receiving patients outside of their local geographic area as 
these systems must plan the post-operative transition of care back to the patient’s regular care providers in 
their local communities. Thus, tailoring the requirement to those patients who do not have an existing care 
relationship with a primary care practitioner would allow hospitals to focus referrals on improving access 
to primary care and assisting with the establishment of longitudinal care relationships for those patients 
who need it most.  
 
Amend Primary Care Referral Requirement to Any Time During the 30-Day Episode 
 
Currently, CMS requires that the referral for primary care services happen prior to discharge from the 
hospital or hospital outpatient department. CMS seeks feedback on whether to extend the referral 
timeframe to require the referral any time before the end of the 30-day episode. (p. 18402). UH supports 
amending the timeframe for the referral requirement to support more tailored transitions from 
 
54 See, for example, AHRQ’s IDEAL Discharge Planning. 
Pg 26 
 
short-term post-operative care back to providers with longitudinal care relationships to support 
care coordination and better outcomes. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this proposed rule. We would be happy to work with CMS 
on any of the issues discussed or other topics that involve the academic community. If you have questions 
regarding our comments, please feel free to contact me at Heidi.Gartland@uhhospitals.org or 
216.403.4050.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Heidi L. Gartland, MHA, FACHE, CDM 
Chief Government & Community Relations Officer 
University Hospitals  
 
 
