 
June 10, 2025 
 
Dr. Mehmet Oz​
Administrator, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services​
Department of Health & Human Services​
​
Submitted via regulations.gov.  
 
RE: “Medicare Program; Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems for Acute Care 
Hospitals and the Long-Term Care Hospital Prospective Payment System and Policy Changes 
and Fiscal Year 2026 Rates; Requirements for Quality Programs; and Other Policy Changes” 
 
Dear Administrator Oz, 
 
United States of Care (USofCare) is pleased to submit comments in response to the proposed 
rule entitled “Medicare Program; Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems (IPPS) for 
Acute Care Hospitals and the Long-Term Care Hospital (LTCH) Prospective Payment System 
(PPS) and Policy Changes and Fiscal Year 2026 Rates; Requirements for Quality Programs; and 
Other Policy Changes” issued by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).  
 
USofCare is a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization working to ensure that everyone has access to 
quality, affordable health care regardless of health status, social need, or income. Importantly, 
we are committed to improving the health of everyday people and are eager to engage in 
solutions that do just that. We advocate for new solutions to tackle our shared health care 
challenges — solutions that people of every demographic tell us will bring them peace of mind 
and make a positive impact on their lives. Through our work in the states and listening to 
people’s experiences with the health care system, we are able to identify unique insights from 
patients on the ground to amplify for uptake at the federal level.  
 
Specifically, USofCare focuses our comments around the following issues within the proposed 
rule: 
 
I.​
Updates to the Transforming Episode Accountability Model (TEAM) 
II.​
Proposals and RFIs Related to Measures for Hospital Quality Programs 
 
Updates to the TEAM Model 
Through our listening work, USofCare knows that people want more time with their doctors, 
better communication between their providers, more personalized and customized care, and the 
ability to be treated as a whole person rather than a series of symptoms; collectively, a system 
grounded in patient-first care. Because of this, USofCare supports the Transforming 
Episode Accountability Model (TEAM) and appreciates that CMS plans to continue 
this model, which will bring more hospitals and providers into patient-first care 
initiatives.  
 
In the FY 2025 IPPS/LTCH PPS final rule, CMS finalized a policy as part of TEAM that would 
require model participants to provide beneficiaries with a referral for  primary care services 
upon or prior to their hospital discharge. We understand that some operational concerns have 
been raised around this requirement and we appreciate that CMS is exploring different policy 
options to address those issues. One of people’s biggest critiques of the fee-for-service payment 
system is that it is fragmented and does not adequately coordinate care across providers. 
 
 
Ensuring that patient-first models like TEAM increase incentives to coordinate care amongst 
providers and invest in care quality improvements that may not otherwise be paid by the 
traditional fee schedule helps bolster patients’ experience with the health care system. In order 
to promote care coordination, USofCare is supportive of maintaining a primary 
care referral requirement in TEAM.  
 
Additionally, we appreciate that the CMS Innovation Center proposes to maintain the 
mandatory nature of TEAM. Requiring hospital participation, a concept supported by both the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission and the Congressional Budget Office, will also allow 
CMS to more fully understand its impact on different patient groups, especially underserved 
populations, ahead of any further model expansion. We believe that mandatory 
participation in this model – as opposed to voluntary participation, where adverse 
selection may limit the usefulness of any collected data – will paint a fuller picture 
of the model's successes, as well as any shortcomings that can be addressed prior 
to any potential expansion. 
 
Proposals and RFIs Related to Measures for Hospital Quality Programs  
We appreciate CMS’s interest in furthering the Administration’s goal of improving health and 
health outcomes, as well as improving the prevention and management of chronic disease by 
integrating well-being and nutrition measures into the Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting 
(IQR) Program. As CMS considers and develops measures for use in the Hospital 
Inpatient Quality Reporting Program, USofCare urges the agency to ensure a 
person-centered focus with measures that have value for patients.  
 
Additionally, our listening work has demonstrated that people overwhelmingly recognize that 
the current U.S. health care system is not equitable — meaning that not everyone can access the 
quality, affordable care they need due to their identity, background, income, social need, or 
where they live. We know that challenges in accessing care, such as cost, a lack of insurance 
coverage, long travel times and other transportation issues, and other factors, can have negative 
impacts on people’s health. As such, we are disappointed that CMS is proposing to remove 
measures related to health equity and social drivers of health from its hospital quality programs. 
We appreciate that CMS is exploring ways to reduce administrative burden for 
hospitals and providers; however, we believe that prioritizing the collection of data 
that can help drive reductions in health disparities outweigh the burden, and we 
urge the agency to reconsider removing these measures. 
 
Conclusion 
Thank you for the opportunity to respond to the proposed rule. Please reach out to Alyssa 
Penna, Director of Federal Policy, at apenna@usofcare.org with any questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Lisa Hunter  
Senior Director for Federal Policy & Advocacy 
United States of Care 
